In the name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
The Compassionate, the Merciful.
Master of the Day of Judgment.
You alone we worship; and upon You, we call for help.
Guide us along the straight path.
The path of those You have blessed, not of those with anger on them, nor of the misguided.
Alif. Lam. Meem.
This is the Book in which there is no doubt, guidance for the righteous.
Those who believe in the Unseen, and perform the prayers, and donate from what We have provided for them.
And those who believe in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you, and are certain of the Hereafter.
These are upon guidance from their Lord. These are the successful.
As for those who disbelieve—it is the same for them, whether you have warned them, or have not warned them—they do not believe.
Allah has sealed their hearts and their hearing, and over their vision is a veil. They will have a severe punishment.
And among the people are those who say, “We believe in Allah and in the Last Day,” but they are not believers.
They try to deceive Allah and those who believe, but they deceive none but themselves, and they are unaware.
In their hearts is a disease, and Allah has increased them in disease. They will have a painful punishment for having lied.
And when it is said to them, “Do not work corruption on earth,” they say, “We are only working righteousness.”
In fact, it is they who are the workers of corruption, but they are unaware.
And when it is said to them, “Believe as the people have believed,” they say, “Shall we believe as the fools have believed?” In fact, it is they who are the fools, but they do not know.
And when they come across those who believe, they say, “We have believed.” But when they are alone with their devils, they say, “We are with you, we were only mocking.”
It is Allah who mocks them, and He leaves them bewildered in their transgression.
It is they who have traded guidance for misguidance, so their trade was not profitable, and they are not guided.
Their example is similar to the example of a person who kindles a fire; but when it illuminates his surroundings, Allah takes away their light, leaving them in darkness—unable to see.
Deaf, dumb, blind. They will not return.
Or like a rainstorm from the sky, in which there is darkness, and thunder, and lightning. They press their fingers into their ears against the thunderclaps, fearing death. But Allah surrounds the disbelievers.
The lightning almost snatches their sight away. Whenever it illuminates for them, they walk in it. And when darkness comes over them, they stand still. Had Allah willed, He could have taken away their hearing and their sight. Allah is capable of all things.
O, people! Worship your Lord, Who created you, and those before you, so that you may attain piety.
He who made the earth a habitat for you, and the sky a structure, and sends water down from the sky, with which He produces fruits for your sustenance. So do not set up rivals to Allah, knowingly.
And if you are in doubt about what We have revealed to Our servant, then produce a chapter like it, and call your witnesses apart from Allah, if you are truthful.
But if you do not, and you will not, then beware the Fire whose fuel is people and stones, prepared for the disbelievers.
And give good news to those who believe and do righteous deeds; that they will have gardens beneath which rivers flow. Whenever they are provided with fruit from it, as sustenance, they will say, “This is what we were provided with before,” and they will be given the like of it. And they will have pure spouses in it, and they will abide in it eternally.
Allah does not shy away from presenting a parable of a gnat, or something above it. As for those who believe, they know that it is the Truth from their Lord. But as for those who disbelieve, they say, “What did Allah mean by this parable?” He misleads many by it, and He guides many by it, but He misleads none but the wrongdoers.
Those who violate Allah’s covenant after its confirmation, and sever what Allah has commanded to be joined, and work corruption on earth. These are the losers.
How can you disbelieve in Allah, when you were lifeless, and He gave you life, then He will cause you to die, then He will bring you to life, then to Him you will be returned?
It is He who created for you everything on earth, then turned towards heaven, and formed them seven heavens. And He has knowledge of all things.
When your Lord said to the angels, “I am placing a successor on earth.” They said, “Will You place in it someone who will work corruption in it, and shed blood, while we declare Your praises and sanctify You?” He said, “I know what you do not know.”
And He taught Adam the names, all of them. Then He presented them to the angels, and said, “Tell Me the names of these, if you are truthful.”
They said, “Glory be to You! We have no knowledge except what You have taught us. It is you who are the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.”
He said, “O Adam, inform them of their names.” And when he informed them of their names, He said, “Did I not tell you that I know the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and that I know what you disclose and what you conceal?”
And We said to the angels, “Prostrate to Adam.” So they prostrated, except for Iblis. He refused, acted arrogantly, and became of the disbelievers.
We said, “O Adam, inhabit the Garden, you and your wife, and eat from it freely as you please, but do not approach this tree, otherwise you will become of the wrongdoers.”
But Satan caused them to slip from it, and he caused them to depart the state they were in. We said, “Go down, some of you enemies to one another. And on earth, you will have a residence, and enjoyment for a while.”
Then Adam received words from his Lord, so He accepted his repentance. He is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful.
We said, “Descend from it, all of you. Yet whenever guidance comes to you from Me, whoever follows My guidance—they have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve.
But as for those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations—these are the inmates of the Fire—where they will remain eternally.”
O Children of Israel! Remember My favors which I bestowed upon you, and fulfill your pledge to Me, and I will fulfill My pledge to you, and revere Me.
And believe in what I revealed, confirming what you have, and do not be the first to deny it, and do not exchange My revelations for a small price, and be conscious of Me.
And do not mix truth with falsehood, nor conceal the truth knowingly.
And attend to your prayers, and practice regular charity, and bow down with those who bow down.
Do you command people to virtuous conduct, and forget yourselves, while you read the Scripture? Do you not understand?
And seek help through patience and prayer. But it is difficult, except for the humble.
Those who know that they will meet their Lord, and that to Him they will return.
O Children of Israel! Remember My blessing which I bestowed upon you, and that I favored you over all nations.
And beware of a Day when no soul will benefit another in any way, nor will any intercession be accepted on its behalf, nor will any ransom be accepted from it, nor will they be helped.
And when We saved you from Pharaoh’s people. They subjected you to terrible persecution: killing your sons while sparing your women. In that was a severe trial from your Lord.
And recall that We parted the sea for you, so We saved you, and We drowned Pharaoh’s people as you looked on.
And when We appointed forty nights for Moses, then you took to worshiping the calf in his absence, acting wrongfully.
Then We pardoned you after that: so perhaps you would be thankful.
And when We gave Moses the Scripture and the Criterion, so perhaps you would be guided.
And when Moses said to his people, “O my people! You have wronged yourselves by taking up the calf. So repent to your Maker, and kill yourselves. That is best for you with your Maker.” So He redeemed you. He is the Redeemer, the Merciful.
And when you said, “O Moses, we will not believe in you unless we see Allah plainly.” So the thunderbolt struck you, as you looked on.
Then We resurrected you after your death, so that you may be appreciative.
And We shaded you with clouds, and We sent down to you manna and quails: “Eat of the good things We have provided for you.” They did not wrong Us, but they used to wrong their own souls.
And when We said, “Enter this town, and eat plentifully from it whatever you wish; but enter the gate humbly, and say, ‘Absolve us.' We will forgive your sins, and we will give increase to the virtuous.”
But the wrongdoers among them substituted words other than those given to them, so We sent down on the wrongdoers a plague from heaven, because of their wicked behavior.
And when Moses prayed for water for his people. We said, “Strike the rock with your staff.” And twelve springs gushed out from it, and each tribe recognized its drinking-place. “Eat and drink from Allah’s provision, and do not corrupt the earth with disobedience.”
And when you said, “O Moses, we cannot endure one kind of food. So call upon your Lord on our behalf: that He may produce for us of what the earth grows: of its herbs, its cucumbers, its garlic, its lentils, and its onions.” He said, “Will you exchange what is good for what is worse? Go down to a town, and you will have what you asked for.” They were stricken with disgrace and misery, and incurred wrath from Allah. That was because they rejected Allah’s revelations and wrongfully killed the prophets. That was because they disobeyed and committed aggression.
Those who believed, and those who are Jewish, and the Christians, and the Sabeans—whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and acts righteously—will have their reward with their Lord. They have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve.
And when We received a pledge from you, and We raised the Mount above you: “Hold firmly to what we have given you, and remember what is in it, so that you may attain righteousness.”
Yet you turned away afterward. Were it not for Allah’s grace and mercy towards you, you would have been among the losers.
And you knew those among you who violated the Sabbath. We said to them, “Be despicable apes!”
Thus We made it a deterrent for their generation, and for future generations, and a lesson for the reverent.
And when Moses said to his people, “Allah commands you to sacrifice a heifer.” They said, “Do you make a mockery of us?” He said, “Allah forbid that I should be so ignorant.”
They said, “Call upon your Lord for us, to show us which one.” He said, “He says she is a heifer, neither too old, nor too young, but in between. So do as you are commanded.”
They said, “Call upon your Lord for us, to show us what her color is.” He said, “He says she is a yellow heifer, bright in color, pleasing to the beholders.”
They said, “Call upon your Lord for us, to show us which one; the heifers look alike to us; and Allah willing, we will be guided.”
He said, “He says she is a heifer, neither yoked to plow the earth, nor to irrigate the field; sound without blemish.” They said, “Now you have come with the truth.” So they slew her, though they almost did not.
And when you killed a person, and put the blame on each other; but Allah was to expose what you were hiding.
We said, “Strike him with part of it.” Thus Allah gives life to the dead. And He shows you His signs, so that you may understand.
Then, after that, your hearts hardened. They were as rocks, or even harder. For there are rocks from which rivers gush out, and others that splinter and water comes out of them, and others that fall in awe of Allah. Allah is not unaware of what you do.
Do you hope that they will believe in you, when some of them used to hear the Word of Allah, and then deliberately distort it, even after understanding it?
And when they come across those who believe, they say, “We believe.” But when they come together privately, they say, “Will you disclose to them knowledge Allah has revealed to you, so that they may use it against you before your Lord?” Do you not understand?
Do they not know that Allah knows what they keep secret and what they declare?
And among them are uneducated who know the Scripture only through hearsay, and they only speculate.
So woe to those who write the Scripture with their own hands, and then say, “This is from Allah,” in order to exchange it for a little price. Woe to them for what their hands have written, and woe to them for what they earn.
And they say, “The Fire will not touch us except for a number of days.” Say, “Have you received a promise from Allah—Allah never breaks His promise—or are you saying about Allah what you do not know?”
Indeed, whoever commits misdeeds, and becomes besieged by his sins—these are the inmates of the Fire, where they will dwell forever.
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds—these are the inhabitants of Paradise, where they will dwell forever.
We made a covenant with the Children of Israel: “Worship none but Allah. And be good to parents, and relatives, and orphans, and the needy. And speak nicely to people, and pray regularly, and give alms.” Then you turned away, except for a few of you, backsliding.
And We made a covenant with you: “Do not shed the blood of your own, nor evict your own from your homes.” You agreed and were witnesses.
But here you are, killing your own, and expelling a group of your own from their homes—conspiring against them in wrongdoing and hostility. And when they come to you as captives, you ransom them, although it was forbidden to you. Is it that you believe in part of the Scripture, and you reject a part? What is the repayment for those among you who do that, except humiliation in this life of this world? And on the Day of Resurrection, they will be assigned to the most severe torment. Allah is not unaware of what you do.
It is they who have purchased the present life at the price of the Hereafter. So the punishment will not be reduced for them, nor will they be helped.
We gave Moses the Scripture, and We sent after him successive messengers. And We gave Jesus, son of Mary, the clear proofs, and We supported him with the Holy Spirit. Is it that whenever a messenger comes to you with anything your souls do not desire, you grew arrogant, calling some liars, and killing others?
And they said, “Our hearts are sealed.” In fact, Allah has cursed them for their ingratitude. They have little faith.
And when a scripture came to them from Allah, confirming what they have—although they were previously seeking help against those who disbelieved—but when there came to them what they recognized, they denied it. So Allah’s curse is upon the disbelievers.
Miserable is what they sold their souls for—rejecting what Allah has revealed, out of resentment that Allah would reveal His grace upon whomever He wills from among His servants. So they incurred wrath upon wrath. And the unbelievers will have a demeaning punishment.
And when it is said to them, “Believe in what Allah has revealed,” they say, “We believe in what was revealed to us,” and they deny what came afterward, although it is the truth, confirming what they have. Say, “Then why did you murder Allah’s prophets before, if you are believers?”
Moses came to you with clear proofs, yet you adopted the calf in his absence, and you were in the wrong.
And We made a covenant with you, and We raised the Mount above you: “Take what We have given you firmly, and listen.” They said, “We hear and disobey.” And their hearts became filled with the love of the calf because of their disbelief. Say, “Dreadful is what your faith prompts you to do—if you are believers.”
Say, “If the Final Home with Allah is yours alone, to the exclusion of all other people, then wish for death if you are truthful.”
But they will never wish for it, because of what their hands have forwarded. And Allah is aware of the unjust.
You will find them, of all humankind, the most eager for life, even more than the associators. Every one of them wishes to live a thousand years, but to be granted a long life will not nudge him from the punishment. Allah sees everything they do.
Say, “Whoever is hostile to Gabriel—it is he who revealed it to your heart by Allah’s leave, confirming what preceded it, and guidance and good news for believers.”
Whoever is hostile to Allah, and His angels, and His messengers, and Gabriel, and Michael—Allah is hostile to the faithless.
We have revealed to you clear Verses, and none reject them except the sinners.
Is it not that whenever they make a covenant, some of them toss it aside? In fact, most of them do not believe.
And when a messenger from Allah came to them—confirming what they have—a faction of those who were given the Book threw the Book of Allah behind their backs, as if they do not know.
And they followed what the devils taught during the reign of Solomon. It was not Solomon who disbelieved, but it was the devils who disbelieved, teaching people witchcraft, and what was revealed in Babylon to the two angels Harut and Marut. Although they taught no one without declaring, “We are a test, so do not lose faith.” But they learned from them the means of causing separation between man and his wife. But they cannot harm anyone except with Allah's consent. And they learned what harms them, and does not benefit them. Yet they knew, that whoever deals in it, will have no share in the Hereafter. Evil is what they sold their souls for—if they only knew.
Had they believed and been righteous, the reward from Allah would be better—if they only knew.
O you who believe! Do not say ambiguous words, but say words of respect, and listen. The disbelievers will have a painful punishment.
It is never the wish of the disbelievers from among the People of the Scripture, nor of the associators, that any good should come down to you from your Lord. But Allah assigns His mercy to whom He wills. Allah is Possessor of Immense Grace.
We never nullify a verse, nor cause it to be forgotten, unless We bring a better one or an equivalent one. Do you not know that Allah is capable of all things?
Do you not know that to Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and earth; and that besides Allah, you have neither guardian nor helper?
Or do you intend to ask your Messenger as Moses was asked before? Whoever exchanges belief for unbelief has strayed from the right path.
Many among the People of the Scripture wish to turn you back into unbelievers after you have believed, out of their envy, after the truth has become clear to them. But pardon and overlook, until Allah brings His command. Allah has power over all things.
And perform the prayer, and give the purifying alms. Whatever good you forward for yourselves, you will find it with Allah. Allah is Seeing of everything you do.
And they say, “None will enter Heaven unless he is a Jew or a Christian.” These are their wishes. Say, “Produce your proof, if you are truthful.”
In fact, whoever submits himself to Allah, and is a doer of good, will have his reward with his Lord—they have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve.
The Jews say, “The Christians are not based on anything.” And the Christians say, “The Jews are not based on anything.” Yet they read the Scripture. Likewise, the ignorant said the same thing. Allah will judge between them on Resurrection Day regarding their disputes.
And who is more wrong-doing than he who prevents Allah’s name from being commemorated in His places of worship, and endeavors for their ruin? These ought not to enter them, except in fear. For them is disgrace in this world, and for them is a tremendous punishment in the Hereafter.
To Allah belong the East and the West. Whichever way you turn, there is Allah’s presence. Allah is Omnipresent and Omniscient.
And they say, “Allah has begotten a child.” Be He glorified. In fact, to Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth—all are obedient to Him.
The Originator of the heavens and the earth. When decides on an issue, He says to it, “Be,” and will be.
Those who do not know say, “If only Allah would speak to us, or a sign would come to us.” Those who came before said the same. Their hearts are similar. We made the Verses clear, for people who are certain.
We sent you with the truth—bringing good news and delivering warnings. And you will not be questioned about the inmates of Hellfire.
The Jews and the Christians will never approve of you: unless you follow their creed. Say, “Allah’s guidance is the guidance.” Should you follow their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, you will have in Allah neither guardian nor helper.
Those to whom We gave the Scripture follow it, as it ought to be followed—these believe in it. But whoever rejects it—these are the losers.
O Children of Israel! Remember My favor which I bestowed upon you, and that I favored you over all people.
And beware of a Day when no soul will avail another soul in any way, and no ransom will be accepted from it, and no mediation will benefit it, and they will not be helped.
And when his Lord tested Abraham with certain words, which he fulfilled. He said, “I am making you a leader of humanity.” He said, “And of my descendants?” He said, “My covenant is not extended to the wrongdoers.”
And We made the House a focal point for the people—and a sanctuary. Take the shrine of Abraham as a place of prayer. And We commissioned Abraham and Ishmael: “Sanctify My House for those who circle around, and those who seclude themselves, and those who bow and prostrate.”
When Abraham said, “My Lord, make this a peaceful land, and provide its people with fruits—whoever of them believes in Allah and the Last Day.” He said, “And whoever disbelieves, I will give him a little enjoyment, then I will consign him to the punishment of the Fire—a miserable destiny!”
As Abraham raises the foundations of the House, together with Ishmael, “Our Lord, accept from us; You are the Hearer, the Knower.
Our Lord, and make us submissive to You, and from our descendants a community submissive to You. And show us our rites, and accept our repentance. You are the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful.
Our Lord, and raise up among them a messenger, of themselves, who will recite Your revelations to them, and will teach them the Book and Wisdom, and purify them. You are the Almighty, the Wise.”
And who would forsake Abraham’s religion, except he who fools himself? We chose him in this life; and in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.
When his Lord said to him, “Submit,” he said, “I have submitted to the Lord of the Worlds.”
And Abraham advised his sons, along with Jacob, “O my sons, Allah has chosen this faith for you, so do not die except in submission.”
Or were you witnesses when death approached Jacob, and he said to his sons, “What will you worship after Me?” They said, “We will worship your God and the God of your fathers Abraham, Ishmael, and Isaac. One God. And to Him, we submit.”
That is a community that has passed. Theirs is what they earned, and yours is what you earned, and you will not be questioned about what they used to do.
And they say, “Be Jews or Christians, and you will be guided.” Say, “Rather, the religion of Abraham, the Monotheist—who was not an associator.”
Say, “We believe in Allah, and in what was revealed to us, and in what was revealed to Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, and in what was given to Moses and Jesus, and in what was given to the prophets from their Lord. We do not differentiate between any of them. And to Him, we surrender.”
If they believe in the same as you have believed in, then they have been guided. But if they turn away, then they are in schism. Allah will suffice you against them. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Allah’s coloring. And who gives better coloring than Allah? “And we are worshipers of Him.”
Say, “Do you argue with us about Allah, when He is our Lord and your Lord, and we have our works, and you have your works, and we are sincere towards Him?”
Or do you say that Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Tribes were Jews or Christians? Say, “Do you know better, or Allah?” And who is more wrong-doing than he who conceals a testimony he has received from Allah? Allah is not unaware of what you do.
That is a community that has passed. Theirs is what they earned, and yours is what you earned. And you will not be questioned about what they used to do.
The foolish among the people will say, “What turned them away from the direction of prayer they used to face?” Say, “To Allah belong the East and the West. He guides whom He wills to a straight path.”
And so We made you a moderate nation, that you may be witnesses over humanity, and that the Messenger may be a witness over you. And We only established the direction of prayer, which you once followed, so that We may distinguish those who follow the Messenger from those who turn on their heels. It is certainly difficult, except for those whom Allah guided. But Allah would never let your faith go to waste. Allah is Kind towards the people, Most Merciful.
We have seen the turning of your face towards heaven. So We will turn you towards a direction that will satisfy you. So turn your face towards the Sacred Mosque. And wherever you may be, turn your faces towards it. Those who were given the Scripture know this to be the Truth from their Lord, and Allah is not unaware of what they do.
Even if you were to bring to those who were given the Scripture every Verse, they would not follow your direction, nor are you to follow their direction, nor do they follow one another’s direction. And if you were to follow their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, you would be one of the wrongdoers.
Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize it as they recognize their own children. But some of them conceal the truth knowingly.
The truth is from your Lord, so do not be of those who doubt.
Everyone has a direction toward which he turns. So race towards goodness. Wherever you may be, Allah will bring you all together. Allah is capable of all things.
And wherever you come from, turn your face towards the Sacred Sanctuary. This is the truth from your Lord, and Allah is never heedless of what you do.
And wherever you come from, turn your face towards the Sacred Sanctuary. And wherever you may be, turn your faces towards it. So that people may have no argument against you—except those who do wrong among them. So do not fear them, but fear Me, so that I may complete My favor upon you, so that you may be guided.
Just as We sent to you a messenger from among you: reading Our revelations to you, and purifying you, and teaching you the Scripture and wisdom, and teaching you what you did not know.
So remember Me, and I will remember you. And thank Me, and never be ungrateful.
O you who believe! Seek help through patience and prayers. Allah is with the patient.
And do not say of those who are killed in Allah’s path, “they are dead.” In fact, they are alive, but you do not perceive.
We will test you with some fear, and hunger, and loss of wealth and lives and crops—but give good news to those who patiently endure.
Those who, when afflicted by a calamity, say, “To Allah, we belong, and to Him, we are returning.”
Upon these are blessings and mercy from their Lord. These are the guided ones.
Safa and Marwa are among the rites of Allah. Whoever performs the Pilgrimage to the House, or performs the Minor Pilgrimage, must stride between them. And whoever volunteers good—Allah is Appreciative and Knowledgeable.
Those who suppress the evidence and the guidance We revealed—after We made it clear for the people in the Book. These: Allah curses them, and the cursers curse them.
Except for those who repent, and reform, and proclaim. These: I will accept their repentance. I am the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful.
But as for those who reject faith, and die rejecting—these: upon them is the curse of Allah, and of the angels, and of all people.
They will remain under it forever, and the suffering will not be reduced for them, nor will they be reprieved.
Your God is one God. There is no god but He, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
In the creation of the heavens and the earth; in the alternation of night and day; in the ships that sail the oceans for the benefit of humanity; in the rain that Allah sends down from the sky, with which He revives the earth after its death; in the scattering of all kinds of creatures throughout; in the shifting of the winds, and the clouds drifting between the sky and the earth; are signs for people who understand.
Yet among the people are those who take others as Allah’s equals. They love them as the love of Allah. But those who believe have a greater love for Allah. If only the wrongdoers would realize when they see the suffering, that all power belongs to Allah, and that Allah is severe in punishment.
When those who were followed disown those who followed, and they see the punishment, and ties between them are severed.
Those who followed will say, “If we can have another chance, we will disown them, as they disowned us.” Thus Allah will show them their deeds, as a source of regret for them, and they will not get out of the Fire.
O, people! Eat of what is lawful and good on the earth, and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. He is to you an open enemy.
He entices you to commit evil and indecency, and to say about Allah what you do not know.
And when it is said to them, “Follow what Allah has revealed,” they say, “We only follow what we found our ancestors practicing.” Even if their ancestors understood nothing, and were not guided?
The parable of those who disbelieve is that of someone who calls upon someone who hears nothing except screaming and yelling. Deaf, dumb, blind—they do not understand.
O you who believe! Eat of the good things We have provided for you, and give thanks to Allah, if it is Him that you worship.
He has forbidden you carrion, blood, the flesh of swine, and what was offered to other than Allah. But whoever is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor excess—he commits no sin. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Those who conceal what Allah has revealed in the Book, and exchange it for a small price—these consume nothing but fire into their bellies. And Allah will not speak to them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them, and they will have a painful punishment.
It is they who exchange guidance for misguidance, and forgiveness for punishment, yet they have no tolerance for the Fire.
That is because Allah revealed the Book in truth, and those who differ about the Book are in deep discord.
Righteousness does not consist of turning your faces towards the East and the West. But righteous is he who believes in Allah, and the Last Day, and the angels, and the Scripture, and the prophets. Who gives money, however cherished, to relatives, and orphans, and the needy, and the homeless, and the beggars, and for freeing slaves; those who perform the prayers, and pay the obligatory charity, and fulfill their promises when they promise, and patiently persevere in the face of persecution, hardship, and in the time of conflict. These are the sincere; these are the reverent.
O you who believe! Retaliation is prescribed for you in case of murder: the free for the free, the slave for the slave, the female for the female. But if he is forgiven by his kin, then grant any reasonable demand, and pay with goodwill. This is a relief from your Lord—and mercy. But whoever commits aggression after that will have a painful punishment.
There is life for you in retaliation, O people of understanding, so that you may refrain.
It is decreed for you: when death approaches one of you, and he leaves wealth, to make a will in favor of the parents and the relatives—in fairness—a duty upon the righteous.
But if anyone changes it after hearing it, the guilt is upon those who change it. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Should someone suspect bias or injustice by a testator, and then reconciles between them, he commits no sin. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O you who believe! Fasting is prescribed for you, as it was prescribed for those before you, so that you may become righteous.
For a specified number of days. But whoever among you is sick or traveling, then a number of other days. For those who are able: a ransom of feeding a needy person. But whoever volunteers goodness, it is better for him. But to fast is better for you, if you only knew.
Ramadan is the month in which the Quran was revealed. Guidance for humanity, and clear proofs of the guidance, and the Criterion. Whoever of you witnesses the month shall fast it. But whoever is sick, or traveling, then a number of other days. Allah intends ease for you, and He does not intend difficulty for you, so that you may complete the number, and glorify Allah for having guided you, so that you may be thankful.
And when My servants ask you about Me: I Am near, I answer the call of the caller when he calls on Me. So let them respond to Me, and have faith in Me, so they may be guided.
Permitted for you is intercourse with your wives on the night of the fast. They are a garment for you, and you are a garment for them. Allah knows that you were betraying yourselves, but He turned to you and pardoned you. So approach them now, and seek what Allah has ordained for you, and eat and drink until the white thread of dawn can be distinguished from the black thread. Then complete the fast until nightfall. But do not approach them while you are in seclusion at the mosques. These are the limits set by Allah, so do not go near them. Allah thus makes clear His revelations to people, so that they may protect themselves.
And do not consume one another’s wealth by unjust means, nor deliberately offer it as bribes to authorities in order to illicitly consume part of people’s wealth.
They ask you about the crescents. Say, “They are timetables for people, and for the Hajj.” It is not virtuous that you approach homes from their backs, but virtue is to be pious. So approach homes through their doors. And be conscious of Allah, so you may succeed.
And fight in Allah’s way those who fight you, but do not commit aggression—Allah does not love the aggressors.
And kill them wherever you overtake them, and expel them from where they have expelled you. Oppression is more severe than murder. But do not fight them at the Sacred Sanctuary, unless they fight you there. If they fight you, then kill them—such is the payback for the unbelievers.
But if they cease, then Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
And fight them until there is no more oppression, and all worship is devoted to Allah. But if they cease, then let there be no hostility, except against the oppressors.
The sacred month for the sacred month; and sacrilege calls for retaliation. Whoever commits aggression against you, retaliate against him in the same measure as he has committed against you. And be mindful of Allah, and know that Allah is with the righteous.
And spend in the cause of Allah, and do not contribute to your own ruin, and be charitable. Allah loves the charitable.
And complete the Hajj and the Umrah for Allah. But if you are prevented, then whatever offering is feasible. And do not shave your heads until the offering has reached its destination. But if any of you is sick, or has a head injury: then redemption by fasting, or charity, or worship. When you are secure: whoever continues the Umrah until the Hajj, then whatever offering is feasible. But whoever lacks the means: then fasting for three days during the Hajj and seven when you have returned, making ten in all. This is for anyone whose family is not present at the Sacred Sanctuary. And reverence Allah, and know that Allah is severe in retribution.
The Hajj is during specific months. Whoever commits to performing the Hajj—there shall be no sexual relations, nor misconduct, nor quarreling during the Hajj. Whatever good you do, Allah knows it. And take the necessary provision, but the best provision is righteousness. And be mindful of Me, O possessors of understanding.
You commit no wrong by seeking your Lord’s bounty. But when you disperse from Arafat, commemorate Allah at the Sacred Landmark. And commemorate Him for having guided you. Although, prior to that, you were of those astray.
Then disperse from where the people have dispersed, and ask Allah for forgiveness. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
When you have completed your rites: remember Allah as you remember your parents, or even more. Among the people is he who says, “Our Lord, give us in this world,” but there is no share for him in the Hereafter.
And among them is he who says, “Our Lord, give us goodness in this world, and goodness in the Hereafter, and protect us from the suffering of the Fire.”
These will have a share of what they have earned. Allah is swift in reckoning.
And commemorate Allah during the designated days. But whoever hurries on in two days commits no wrong. And whoever stays on commits no wrong—provided he maintains righteousness. And obey Allah. And know, that to Him you will be gathered.
Among the people is he whose words about the worldly life impress you, and he calls Allah to witness what is in his heart, yet he is the fiercest of adversaries.
And when he gains power, he strives to spread corruption on earth, destroying properties and lives. Allah does not like corruption.
And when it is said to him, “Beware of Allah,” his pride leads him to sin. Sufficient for him is Hell—a dreadful residence.
And among the people is he who sells his life seeking to please Allah. Allah is Kind towards the servants.
O you who believe! Enter into submission, wholeheartedly, and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. He is your sworn enemy.
But if you stumble after the clear proofs have come to you, then know that Allah is Powerful and Wise.
Are they waiting for Allah Himself to come to them in the shadows of the clouds, along with the angels, and the matter is settled? All matters are returned to Allah.
Ask the Children of Israel how many clear proofs We have given them. Whoever trades Allah’s favor after it has come to him—Allah is severe in retribution.
Beautified is the life of this world for those who disbelieve, and they ridicule those who believe. But the righteous will be above them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah provides to whom He wills without measure.
Humanity was a single community; then Allah sent the prophets, as deliverers of good news and warners. And with them He sent down the Scripture, with the truth, to judge between people regarding their differences. And only those who were given it differed about it—after clear proofs came to them—out of envy among themselves. Then Allah guided those who believed to the truth they had disputed, in accordance with His will. Allah guides whom He wills to a straight path.
Or do you expect to enter Paradise without experiencing the equivalent of what happened to those before you? Adversity and hardship afflicted them, and they were so shaken, that the Messenger and those who believed with him said, “When is Allah’s help?” Surely, Allah’s help is near.
They ask you what they should contribute. Say, “Whatever charity you give is for the parents, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the poor, and the traveler. Whatever good you do, Allah knows it.”
Fighting is ordained for you, even though you hate it. But it may be that you hate something while it is good for you, and it may be that you love something while it is bad for you. Allah knows, and you do not know.
They ask you about fighting during the Holy Month. Say, “Fighting in it is deplorable. But hindering others from Allah’s path, and rejecting Him, and preventing access to the Holy Mosque, and expelling its residents from it, are more deplorable with Allah. And persecution is more severe than murder.” They will not cease fighting you until they have turned you back from your faith—if they are able. Whoever among you turns back from his faith, and dies an unbeliever—these are they whose works will come to nothing, in this life, and in the Hereafter. These are the inhabitants of the Fire, remaining in it forever.
Those who believe, and those who migrate and strive in Allah’s path—it is they who hope for Allah’s Mercy. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
They ask you about intoxicants and gambling. Say, “There is a gross sin in them, and some benefits for people, but their sinfulness outweighs their benefit.” And they ask you what they should contribute. Say, “Whatever can be spared.” Thus Allah makes clear the Verses for you, so you may think.
About this life and the next. And they ask you about orphans. Say, “Improvement for them is best. And if you intermingle with them, then they are your brothers.” Allah knows the corruptor from the reformer. Had Allah willed, He could have overburdened you. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Do not marry idolatrous women, until they have believed. A believing maid is better than an idolatress, even if you like her. And do not marry idolatrous men, until they have believed. A believing servant is better than an idolater, even if you like him. These call to the Fire, but Allah invites to the Garden and to forgiveness, by His permission. He makes clear His communications to the people, so that they may remember.
And they ask you about menstruation: say, “It is harmful, so stay away from women during menstruation. And do not approach them until they have become pure. Once they have become pure, approach them in the manner Allah has directed you.” Allah loves the repentant, and He loves those who keep clean.”
Your women are cultivation for you; so approach your cultivation whenever you like, and send ahead for yourselves. And fear Allah, and know that you will meet Him. And give good news to believers.
And do not let your oaths in Allah's name hinder you from virtue, righteousness, and making peace between people. Allah is Listener and Knower.
Allah does not hold you responsible for your unintentional oaths, but He holds you responsible for your intentions. Allah is Forgiving and Clement.
Those who vow abstinence from their wives must wait for four months. But if they return—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
But if they resolve on divorce—Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Divorced women shall wait by themselves for three periods. And it is not lawful for them to conceal what Allah has created in their wombs—if they believe in Allah and the Last Day. And their husbands have the better right to take them back—if they desire reconciliation. And women have rights similar to their obligations, according to what is fair. But men have a degree over them. Allah is Powerful and Wise.
Divorce is twice. Then, either honorable retention or setting free kindly. It is not lawful for you to take back anything you have given them—unless they fear they cannot keep Allah's limits. If you fear they cannot keep Allah’s limits, then there is no blame on them in what she may give in ransom. These are Allah’s limits, so do not violate them. Those who violate Allah’s limits are the wrongdoers.
If he divorces her, she is no longer lawful for him, until she marries another man. If he divorces her, then there is no blame on them for reuniting, provided they think they can maintain Allah's limits. These are the limits set by Allah; He makes them clear to people who know.
And when you have divorced women, and they have reached their term, either retain them amicably or release them amicably. But do not retain them to hurt them and commit aggression. Whoever does that has wronged himself. And do not take Allah’s revelations for a joke. And remember Allah's blessing upon you, and that He revealed to you the Scripture and Wisdom, to teach you. And be cautious of Allah, and know that Allah knows everything.
When you have divorced women, and they have reached their term, do not prevent them from marrying their husbands, provided they mutually agree on fair terms. This is enjoined on whomever among you believes in Allah and the Last Day. That is purer for you, and more decent. Allah knows, and you do not know.
And let mothers nurse their infants for two full years, for those who desire to complete the nursing. It is the duty of the father to provide for them and clothe them in a proper manner. No soul shall be burdened beyond its capacity. No mother shall be harmed on account of her child, nor shall a father be harmed on account of his child. The same duty rests upon the heir. If they desire separation, by mutual consent and consultation, they commit no error by doing so. You commit no error by hiring nursing-mothers, as long as you pay them fairly. And be wary of Allah, and know that Allah sees everything you do.
As for those among you who die and leave widows behind, they shall wait by themselves for four months and ten days. When they have reached their term, there is no blame on you regarding what they might honorably do with themselves. Allah is aware of everything you do.
You commit no error by announcing your engagement to women, or in keeping it within yourselves. Allah knows that you will be thinking about them. But do not meet them secretly, unless you have something proper to say. And do not confirm the marriage tie until the writing is fulfilled. And know that Allah knows what is in your souls, so beware of Him. And know that Allah is Forgiving and Clement.
You commit no error by divorcing women before having touched them, or before having set the dowry for them. And provide for them: the wealthy according to his means, and the poor according to his means. An honorable provision—a duty upon the virtuous.
If you divorce them before you have touched them, but after you had set the dowry for them, then give them half of what you specified—unless they forgo it or he whose hand holds the marriage tie forgoes. But to forego is nearer to piety. And do not forget the grace between yourselves. Allah sees whatever you do.
Guard your prayers, and the middle prayer, and stand before Allah in devotion.
But if you are fearful, then on foot or riding. And when you are secure, remember Allah, as He taught you what you did not know.
Those among you who die leaving widows behind—a will shall provide their widows with support for a year, provided they do not leave. If they leave, there is no blame on you for what they do with themselves, provided it is reasonable. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Divorced women shall be provided for, equitably—an obligation upon the righteous.
Allah thus explains His revelations to you, so you may understand.
Have you not considered those who fled their homes, by the thousands, fearful of death? Allah said to them, “Die.” Then He revived them. Allah is Gracious towards the people, but most people are not thankful.
And fight in the way of Allah, and know that Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Who is he who will lend Allah a generous loan, so He will multiply it for him many times over? Allah restricts and expands. And to Him, you will be returned.
Have you not considered the notables of the Children of Israel after Moses? When they said to a prophet of theirs, “Appoint a king for us, and we will fight in Allah’s way.” He said, “Is it possible that, if fighting was ordained for you, you would not fight?” They said, “And why would we not fight in Allah’s way, when we were expelled from our homes, along with our children?” But when fighting was ordained for them, they turned away, except for a few of them. But Allah knows the wrongdoers.
And their prophet said to them, “Allah has appointed Saul to be your king.” They said, “How can he have authority over us, when we are more deserving of authority than he, and he was not given plenty of wealth?” He said, “Allah has chosen him over you, and has endowed him with knowledge and physique.” Allah gives the authority to whomever He wills. Allah is Infinite, All-Knowing.
And their prophet said to them, “The proof of his kingship is that the Ark will be restored to you, bringing tranquility from your Lord, and relics left by the family of Moses and the family of Aaron. It will be carried by the angels. In this is a sign for you, if you are believers.”
When Saul set out with the troops, he said, “Allah will be testing you with a river. Whoever drinks from it does not belong with me. But whoever does not drink from it, does belong with me, except for whoever scoops up a little with his hand.” But they drank from it, except for a few of them. Then, when he crossed it, he and those who believed with him said, “We have no strength to face Goliath and his troops today.” But those who knew that they would meet Allah said, “How many a small group defeated a large group, by Allah’s will. And Allah is with the patient.”
And when they confronted Goliath and his troops, they said, “Our Lord, pour down patience upon us, and strengthen our foothold, and support us against the disbelieving people.”
And they defeated them by Allah’s will, and David killed Goliath. And Allah gave him sovereignty and wisdom, and He taught him of what He willed. Were it not for Allah’s repelling people, some by means of others, the earth would have gone to ruin. But Allah is gracious towards humanity.
These are Allah’s revelations, which We recite to you in truth. You are one of the messengers.
These messengers: We gave some advantage over others. To some of them, Allah spoke. And some, He raised in rank. And We gave Jesus the son of Mary the evident miracles, and We strengthened him with the Holy Spirit. Had Allah willed, those who succeeded them would not have fought one another—after the clear signs came to them—but they disputed; some of them believed, and some of them disbelieved. Had Allah willed, they would not have fought one another; but Allah does whatever He wills.
O you who believe! Spend from what We provided for you: before a Day arrives when there is no bargaining, no friendship, and no mediation. The disbelievers are the wrongdoers.
Allah, there is no god except He, the Living, the Everlasting. Neither slumber overtakes Him, nor sleep. To Him belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on earth. Who is there who can intercede with Him without His permission? He knows what is ahead of them, and what is behind them; and they cannot grasp any of His Knowledge, except as He wills. His Throne extends over the heavens and the earth, and their preservation does not burden Him. He is the Most-High, the Tremendous.
Let there be no coercion in religion; the right way has become distinct from the wrong way. Whoever rejects the transgressors, and believes in Allah, has grasped the most trustworthy handle—which never breaks. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Allah is the Guardian of those who believe; He brings them out of darknesses into the light. As for those who disbelieve, their guardians are the transgressors; they bring them out of the light into darknesses—these are the inhabitants of the Fire, remaining in it forever.
Have you not considered him who argued with Abraham about his Lord, because Allah had given him sovereignty? Abraham said, “My Lord is He who gives life and causes death.” He said, “I give life and cause death.” Abraham said, “Allah brings the sun from the East, so bring it from the West,” so the blasphemer was puzzled. Allah does not guide the unjust people.
Or like him who passed by a village collapsed on its foundations. He said, “How can Allah revive this after its demise?” So Allah caused him to die for a hundred years, then resurrected him. He said, “For how long did you remain?” He said, “I remained for a day, or part of a day.” He said, “No. You remained for a hundred years. Now look at your food and drink—they have not spoiled. And look at your donkey. We will make you a wonder for the people. And look at the bones, how We arrange them, and then cover them with flesh.” And when it became clear to him, he said, “I know that Allah is capable of all things.”
And when Abraham said, “My Lord, show me how You give life to the dead.” He said, “Have you not believed?” He said, “Yes, but to reassure my heart.” He said, “Take four birds, and draw them to yourself, then place a part on each hill, then call them, and they will come rushing to you. And know that Allah is Powerful and Wise.”
The parable of those who spend their wealth in Allah’s way is that of a grain that produces seven clusters; in each cluster is a hundred grains. Allah multiplies for whom He wills. Allah is Bountiful and Knowledgeable.
Those who spend their wealth in Allah’s way, then do not follow up their charity with reminders of generosity or with insults—they will have their reward with their Lord—they have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve.
Kind words and forgiveness are better than charity followed by insults. Allah is Rich and Clement.
O you who believe! Do not nullify your charity with reminders and hurtful words, like him who spends his wealth to be seen by the people, and does not believe in Allah and the Last Day. His example is like a smooth rock covered with soil: a downpour strikes it, and leaves it barren—they gain nothing from their efforts. Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
The example of those who spend their possessions seeking to please Allah and to secure themselves is similar to the example of a garden on a hill: if heavy rain falls on it, its produce is doubled; and if no heavy rain falls, then dew is enough. Allah sees whatever you do.
Would anyone of you like to have a garden of date-palms and grapevines, under which rivers flow, with all kinds of fruit in it for him, and old age has stricken him, and he has weak children, then a tornado with fire batters it, and it burns down? Thus Allah explains the verses to you, so you may reflect.
O you who believe! Spend of the good things you have earned, and of what We have produced for you from the earth. And do not pick the inferior things to give away, when you yourselves would not receive it, except with closed eyes. And know that Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.
Satan promises you poverty, and he urges you to immorality. But Allah promises you forgiveness from Himself—and grace. Allah is Limitless and Knowledgeable.
He gives wisdom to whom He wills. Whoever is given wisdom has been given much good. Yet none remember except the possessors of intellect.
Whatever charity you give, or a pledge you fulfill, Allah knows it. And for the wrongdoers, there are no helpers.
If you give charity openly, that is good. But if you keep it secret, and give it to the needy in private, that is better for you. It will atone for some of your misdeeds. Allah is Aware of what you do.
Their guidance is not your responsibility, but Allah guides whom He wills. Any charity you give is for your own good. Any charity you give shall be for the sake of Allah. Any charity you give will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
It is for the poor; those restrained in Allah’s way, and unable to travel in the land. The unaware considers them wealthy, because of their self-respect. You will recognize them by their traits. They do not ask people insistently. Whatever charity you give, Allah knows about it.
Those who spend their wealth by night and by day, privately and publicly, will receive their reward from their Lord. They have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve.
Those who consume usury will not rise, except as someone driven mad by Satan's touch. That is because they say, “Commerce is like usury.” But Allah permitted commerce, and He prohibited usury. Whoever, on receiving advice from his Lord, refrains, may keep his past earnings, and his case rests with Allah. But whoever resumes—these are the dwellers of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
Allah condemns exploitation, and He blesses charities. Allah does not love any disbelieving sinner.
Those who believe, and perform righteous deeds, and pray regularly, and give regular charity—they will have their reward with their Lord—they have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve.
O you who believe! Reverence Allah, and forgo what remains of usury, if you are believers.
And if you do not, then take notice of war by Allah and His Messenger. But if you repent, you may keep your capital, neither wronging nor being wronged.
If someone is in difficult circumstances, then deferment until a time of ease. But to remit it as charity is better for you—if you only knew.
And guard yourselves against a Day when you are returned to Allah, then every soul will be paid in full for what it has earned, and they will not be wronged.
O you who believe! When you contract a debt with one another for a term appointed, write it down. And have a scribe write in your presence, in all fairness. And let no scribe refuse to write, as Allah has taught him. So let him write, and let the debtor dictate, and let him fear Allah his Lord, and diminish nothing from it. But if the debtor is incompetent, or weak, or unable to dictate, then let his guardian dictate justly. And call to witness two witnesses from among your men. If two men cannot be found, then a man and two women from among those whom you approve as witnesses. If one of them forgets, the other will remind her. Witnesses must not refuse when called upon. And do not think it unimportant to write down, whether small or large, including the time of repayment. That is more equitable with Allah, stronger as evidence, and more likely to prevent doubt—except in the case of a spot transaction between you—then there is no blame on you if you do not write it. And let there be witnesses whenever you conclude a contract, and let no harm be done to either scribe or witness. If you do, it is corruption on your part. And fear Allah. Allah teaches you. Allah is Knower of all things.
And if you are on a journey, and cannot find a scribe, then a security deposit should be handed over. But if you trust one another, let the trustee fulfill his trust, and let him fear Allah, his Lord. And do not conceal testimony. Whoever conceals it is a sinner at heart. Allah knows whatever you do.
To Allah belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on earth. Whether you disclose what is in yourselves, or conceal it, Allah will call you to account for it. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills, and Allah is capable of all things.
The Messenger has believed in what was revealed to him from his Lord, as did the believers. They all have believed in Allah, His angels, His scriptures, and His messengers: “We do not differentiate between any of His messengers.” And they say, “We hear and we obey. Your forgiveness, our Lord. To you is the destiny.”
Allah burdens no soul beyond its capacity. To its credit is what it earns, and against it is what it commits. “Our Lord, do not condemn us if we forget or make a mistake. Our Lord, do not burden us as You have burdened those before us. Our Lord, do not impose on us more than we have the strength to bear; and pardon us, and forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are our Master, so help us against the disbelieving people.”
Alif. Lam. Meem.
Allah. There is no god but He—the Living, the Eternal.
He sent down to you the Book with the Truth, confirming what came before it; and He sent down the Torah and the Gospel.
Aforetime, as guidance for humanity; and He sent down the Criterion. Those who reject Allah’s communications will have a severe punishment. Allah is Mighty, Capable of revenge.
Nothing is hidden from Allah, on earth or in heaven.
It is He who forms you in the wombs as He wills. There is no god except He—the Almighty, the Wise.
It is He who revealed to you the Book. Some of its verses are definitive; they are the foundation of the Book, and others are metaphorical. As for those in whose hearts is deviation: they follow the metaphorical ones, seeking disorder, and seeking to derive an interpretation. But none knows its interpretation except Allah and those firmly rooted in knowledge say, “We believe in it; all is from our Lord.” But none remembers except those with understanding.
“Our Lord, do not make our hearts deviate after having guided us, and bestow on us mercy from Your Presence; You are the Giver.”
“Our Lord, You will gather the people for a Day in which there is no doubt.” Allah does not break the promise.
As for those who disbelieve, their wealth and children will never benefit them against Allah. These are Fuel for the Fire.
Like the behavior of Pharaoh’s people and those before them. They rejected Our signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is Severe in retribution.
Say to those who disbelieve, “You will be defeated, and gathered into Hell—an awful place.”
There was a sign for you in the two parties that met. One party fighting in Allah’s way, and the other disbelieving. They saw them twice as many, with their own eyes. But Allah supports with His help whomever He wills. There is a lesson in this for those who have insight.
Adorned for the people is the love of desires: women, and children, and piles upon piles of gold and silver, and branded horses, and livestock, and fields. These are the conveniences of the worldly life, while with Allah is the best place to return.
Say, “Shall I inform you of something better than that? For those who are righteous: with their Lord are Gardens beneath which rivers flow, remaining in there forever, and purified spouses, and acceptance from Allah.” Allah is Observant of the worshipers.
Those who say, “Our Lord, we have believed, so forgive us our sins, and protect us from the suffering of the Fire.”
The patient, the truthful, the reverent, the charitable, the seekers of forgiveness at dawn.
Allah bears witness that there is no god but He—as do the angels, and those endowed with knowledge—upholding justice. There is no god but He, the All-powerful, the Wise.
Religion with Allah is Submission. Those who were given the Scripture differed only after knowledge came to them, due to envy among them. Whoever rejects the Revelations of Allah—Allah is swift in reckoning.
If they dispute with you, say, “I have submitted myself to Allah, and so did my followers.” And say to those who were given the Scripture, and to the unlearned, “Have you submitted?” If they have submitted, then they have been guided. But if they turn away, then your responsibility is to convey. Allah is Seeing of the servants.
As for those who defy Allah’s revelations, and wrongfully kill the prophets, and kill those who advocate justice among the people—promise them a painful punishment.
They are those whose deeds will come to nothing in this world and in the Hereafter, and there are no helpers for them.
Have you not considered those who were given a portion of the Scripture? They were invited to Allah’s Scripture, to arbitrate between them. Then some of them turned back and declined.
That is because they said, “The Fire will not touch us except for a limited number of days.” They were deceived in their faith by the lies they fabricated.
How about when We gather them for a Day in which there is no doubt, and every soul is repaid as it deserves, and they will not be wronged?
Say, “O Allah, Master of Sovereignty. You grant sovereignty to whom You will, and You strip sovereignty from whom you will. You honor whom you will, and You humiliate whom you will. In Your hand is all goodness. You are capable of all things.”
“You merge the night into the day, and You merge the day into the night. And You bring the living from the dead, and You bring the dead from the living. And You provide for whom You will, without measure.”
Believers shall not take disbelievers for allies instead of believers. Whoever does that has nothing to do with Allah, unless you cautiously protect yourself from them. Allah warns you of Himself. And to Allah is the destination.
Say, “Whether you conceal what is in your hearts, or disclose it, Allah knows it.” He knows everything in the heavens and the earth. And Allah is capable of all things.
On the Day when every soul will find all the good it has done presented. And as for the evil it has done, it will wish there were a great distance between them. Allah cautions you of Himself. Allah is Kind towards the worshipers.
Say, “If you love Allah, then follow me, and Allah will love you, and will forgive you your sins.” Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Say, “Obey Allah and the Messenger.” But if they turn away—Allah does not love the faithless.
Allah chose Adam, and Noah, and the family of Abraham, and the family of Imran over all humankind.
Offspring, one of the other. Allah is Hearer and Knower.
The wife of Imran said, “My Lord, I have vowed what is in my womb, to You, dedicated, so accept it from me; You are the Hearer and Knower.”
And when she delivered her, she said, “My Lord, I have delivered a female,” and Allah knew what she delivered, “and the male is not like the female, and I have named her Mary, I place her and her children under your protection from Satan the outcast.”
Her Lord accepted her with a gracious reception, and brought her a beautiful upbringing, and entrusted her to the care of Zechariah. Whenever Zechariah visited her in the sanctuary, he found her supplied with provision. He said, “O Mary, where did you get this from?” She said, “It is from Allah; Allah provides to whom He wills, without account.”
There and then, Zechariah prayed to his Lord. He said, “My Lord, grant me—by your grace—righteous offspring. You are the Hearer of Prayers.”
So then the angels called out to him, while he stood praying in the sanctuary: “Allah gives you good news of John, confirming a word from Allah, and honorable, and moral, and a prophet from the righteous.”
He said, “My Lord, how will I have a son, when old age has overtaken me, and my wife is barren?” He said, “Even so, Allah does whatever He wills.”
He said, “My Lord, give me a sign.” He said, “Your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three days, except by gestures. And remember your Lord frequently, and praise in the evening and the morning.”
The angels said, “O Mary, Allah has chosen you, and has purified you. He has chosen you over all the women of the world.”
“O Mary, be devoted to your Lord, and bow down, and kneel with those who kneel.”
These are accounts from the Unseen which We reveal to you. You were not with them when they cast their lots as to which of them would care for Mary; nor were you with them as they quarreled.
The Angels said, “O Mary, Allah gives you good news of a Word from Him. His name is the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, highly distinguished in this world and the next, and one of the nearest.
He will speak to the people from the crib, and in adulthood, and will be among the righteous.”
She said, “My Lord, how can I have a child when no human has touched me?” He said, “It will be so. Allah creates whatever He wills. When He decides on an issue, He says to it, ‘Be!’ and it is.”
And He will teach him the Scripture and wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel.
And a messenger to the Children of Israel: “I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. I make for you out of clay the shape of a bird; then I breathe in it, and it becomes a bird by Allah’s leave. And I heal the blind and the leprous, and I revive the dead, by Allah’s leave. And I prophesy what you eat, and what you store in your homes. In this is a sign for you, if you are believers.”
“And confirming what is before me of the Torah, and to make permissible for you some of what was forbidden to you. I have come to you with a sign from your Lord. So reverence Allah, and obey me.”
“Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
When Jesus sensed disbelief on their part, he said, “Who are my helpers towards Allah?” The disciples said, “We are Allah’s helpers; we have believed in Allah, so bear witness that we are submitters.”
“Our Lord, we believed in what You have revealed, and we followed the Messenger, so count us among the witnesses.”
They plotted, and Allah planned, but Allah is the Best of planners.
Allah said, “O Jesus, I am completing your life, and raising you to Me, and clearing you of those who disbelieve. And I will make those who follow you above those who disbelieve, until the Day of Resurrection. Then to Me is your return, and I will judge between you regarding your disputes.
As for those who disbelieve, I will punish them with severe punishment, in this life and the next, and they will have no helpers.
And as for those who believe and do good works, He will pay them their rewards in full. Allah does not love the unjust.”
This is what We relate to you of the Verses and the Wise Reminder.
The example of Jesus with Allah is like Adam: He created him from dust, then He said to him, “Be!” and he was.
The truth is from your Lord, so be not of those who doubt.
And if anyone disputes with you about him, after the knowledge that has come to you, say, “Come, let us gather our children and your children, and our women and your women, and ourselves and yourselves, then let us invoke Allah’s curse on the liars.”
This is the true story: there is no god except Allah. Allah is the Mighty, the Wise.
But if they turn away—Allah knows the corrupters.
Say, “O People of the Scripture, come to terms common between us and you: that we worship none but Allah, and that we associate nothing with Him, and that none of us takes others as lords besides Allah.” And if they refuse, say, “be witness that we are Submitters.”
O People of the Scripture! Why do you argue about Abraham, when the Torah and the Gospel were not revealed until after him? Do you not reason?
Here you are—you argue about things you know, but why do you argue about things you do not know? Allah knows, and you do not know.
Abraham was neither a Jew nor a Christian, but he was a Monotheist, a Muslim. And he was not of the associators.
The people most deserving of Abraham are those who followed him, and this prophet, and those who believe. Allah is the Protector of believers.
A group among the People of the Scripture would love to mislead you. But they mislead none but themselves, and they are unaware.
O People of the Scripture! Why do you reject the revelations of Allah, when you yourselves are witnesses?
O People of the Scripture! Why do you mix the truth with falsehood, and conceal the truth knowingly?
Some of the People of the Scripture say, “Believe in what was revealed to the believers during the daytime, and reject it at its end, so they may return.”
And trust none except those who follow your way of life. Say, “Guidance is Allah’s guidance. If someone is given the like of what you were given, or they argue with you before your Lord, say, “All grace is in Allah’s hand; He gives it to whomever He wills. Allah is Bountiful and Knowing.”
He allocates His mercy for whomever He wills. Allah is Possessor of Sublime Grace.
And among the People of the Scripture is he, who, if you entrust him with a heap of gold, he will return it to you. And among them is he, who, if you entrust him with a single coin, he will not return it to you, unless you keep after him. That is because they say, “We are under no obligation towards the Gentiles.” They tell lies about Allah, and they know it.
Indeed, whoever fulfills his commitments and is cautious—Allah loves the reverent.
Those who exchange Allah’s covenant, and their vows, for a small price, will have no share in the Hereafter, and Allah will not speak to them, nor will He look at them on the Day of Resurrection, nor will He purify them. They will have a painful punishment.
Among them are those who twist the Scripture with their tongues, so that you may think it from the Scripture—when it is not from the Scripture. And they say, “It is from Allah”—when it is not from Allah. They tell lies, and they attribute them to Allah, knowingly.
No person to whom Allah has given the Scripture, judgment, and prophethood would say to the people, “Be my worshippers, rather than Allah’s.” But, “Be people of the Lord, according to the Scripture you teach, and the teachings you study.”
Nor would he instruct you to take the angels and the prophets as lords. Will he instruct you to infidelity after you have submitted?
Allah received the covenant of the prophets, “Inasmuch as I have given you of Scripture and wisdom; should a messenger come to you confirming what you have, you shall believe in him, and support him.” He said, “Do you affirm My covenant, and take it upon yourselves?” They said, “We affirm it.” He said, “Then be witness, and I am with you among the witnesses.”
Whoever turns away after that—these are the disobedient.
Do they seek other than the religion of Allah, when to Him has submitted everything in the heavens and on earth, willingly or unwillingly; and to Him, they will be returned?
Say, “We believe in Allah, and in what was revealed to us; and in what was revealed to Abraham, Ishmael, Isaac, Jacob, and the Patriarchs; and in what was given to Moses, and Jesus, and the prophets from their Lord. We do not differentiate between any of them. And to Him, we submit.”
Whoever seeks a religion other than Submission: it will not be accepted from him; and in the Hereafter, he will be among the losers.
How will Allah guide a people who disbelieved after having believed, and had witnessed that the Messenger is true, and the clear proofs did come to them? Allah does not guide the unjust people.
These—their penalty is that upon them falls the curse of Allah, and of the angels, and of humanity.
Remaining in it eternally. The suffering will not be eased for them, nor will they be given relief.
Except those who repent afterward—and reform. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
As for those who disbelieve after having believed, then plunge deeper in disbelief, their repentance will not be accepted—it is they who are astray.
As for those who disbelieve, and die as disbelievers: even the earth full of gold would not be accepted from any of them, were he to offer it for ransom. It is they who will suffer a painful agony, and they will have no helpers.
You will never attain virtuous conduct until you give from what you love. Whatever you give away, Allah knows about it.
All food was permissible for the Children of Israel—except what Israel forbade for itself—before the Torah was revealed. Say, “Bring the Torah, and read it, if you are truthful.”
Whoever fabricates lies against Allah after that—these are the wrongdoers.
Say, “Allah has spoken the truth. So follow the faith of Abraham, the Monotheist—who was not of the associators.”
The first house established for humanity is the one in Bekkah—full of blessings, and guidance for humanity.
In it are clear signs: the Station of Abraham. Whoever enters it attains security. Pilgrimage to the House is a duty upon people before Allah for those who can make the journey. But whoever refuses—Allah is Independent of the worlds.
Say, “O People of the Scripture, why do you reject Allah’s revelations, when Allah is Witness over what you do?”
Say, “O People of the Scripture, why do you hinder from Allah’s path those who believe, seeking to distort it, even though you are witnesses? Allah is not unaware of what you do.”
O you who believe! If you obey a group among those who were given the Book, they will turn you, after your belief, into unbelievers.
And how could you disbelieve, when Allah’s revelations are being recited to you, and His Messenger is among you? Whoever clings to Allah has been guided to a straight path.
O you who believe! Revere Allah with due reverence, and do not die except in Submission.
And hold firmly to the rope of Allah, all together, and be not divided. And remember Allah’s favor upon you; when you were enemies, and He united your hearts, and by His grace you became brethren. And you were on the brink of a fiery pit, and He saved you from it. Thus Allah clarifies his revelations to you, so you may be guided.
And let there be among you a community calling to virtue, and advocating righteousness, and deterring from evil. These are the successful.
And be not like those who became divided and disputed after the clear proofs came to them. It is they who will have a great punishment.
On the Day when faces whiten and faces blacken. As for those whose faces blacken: “Did you disbelieve after having believed?” So taste the punishment for having disbelieved.
But as for those whose faces whiten: they are in Allah’s mercy, remaining in it forever.
These are Allah’s revelations. We recite them to you in truth. Allah desires no injustice for the people.
To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth. And to Allah, all events are returned.
You are the best community that ever emerged for humanity: you advocate what is moral, and forbid what is immoral, and believe in Allah. Had the People of the Scripture believed, it would have been better for them. Among them are the faithful, but most of them are sinful.
They will not harm you, beyond insulting you. And if they fight you, they will turn around and flee, and they will not be helped.
They will be humiliated wherever they are encountered, except through a rope from Allah, and a rope from people; and they have incurred wrath from Allah, and they were stricken with misery. That is because they rejected Allah’s revelations, and killed the prophets unjustly. That is because they rebelled and committed aggression.
They are not alike: among the People of the Scripture is an upright community; they read Allah’s revelations throughout the night, and they bow down.
They believe in Allah and the Last Day, and advocate righteousness, and forbid evil, and are quick to do good deeds. These are among the righteous.
Whatever good they do, they will not be denied it. Allah knows the reverent.
As for those who disbelieve: neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against Allah. These are the inhabitants of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
The parable of what they spend in this worldly life is that of a frosty wind that strikes the harvest of a people who have wronged themselves, and it destroys it. Allah did not wrong them, but they wronged their own selves.
O you who believe! Do not befriend outsiders who spare no effort to ruin you. They love to see you suffer. Hatred is apparent in what they say, but what their hearts conceal is worse. We made the communications clear for you—if you understand.
Here you are! You love them, but they do not love you, and you believe in the entire Scripture. And when they meet you, they say, “We believe.” But when they are alone, they bite their fingers at you in rage. Say, “Die in your rage; Allah knows what the hearts contain.”
If goodness befalls you, it upsets them; but if something bad befalls you, they rejoice in it. But if you are patient and maintain righteousness, their schemes will not harm you in the least. Allah comprehends what they do.
Remember when you left your family in the morning, to assign for the believers battle-positions. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
When two groups among you almost faltered, but Allah was their Protector. So in Allah let the believers trust.
Allah had given you victory at Badr when you were weak. So be mindful of Allah, so that you may be thankful.
When you said to the believers, “Is it not enough for you, that your Lord has reinforced you with three thousand angels, sent down?”
Most certainly. But if you persevere and remain cautious, and they attack you suddenly, your Lord will reinforce you with five thousand angels, well trained.
Allah has made it but a message of hope for you, and to reassure your hearts with it. There is no victory except from Allah the Mighty, the Wise.
In order to destroy a flank of those who disbelieved, or to subdue them, so that they retreat disappointed.
It is no concern of yours: whether He accepts their repentance, or He punishes them. They are wrongdoers.
To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
O you who believe! Do not feed on usury, compounded over and over—and fear Allah, so that you may prosper.
And protect yourselves from the Fire that is prepared for the unbelievers.
And obey Allah and the Messenger, so you may receive mercy.
And race towards forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden as wide as the heavens and the earth: prepared for the cautious.
Those who give in prosperity and in adversity, and restrain anger, and forgive people. Allah loves the doers of good.
And those who, when they commit an indecency or wrong themselves, remember Allah and ask forgiveness for their sins—and who except Allah forgives sins? And they do not knowingly persist in their wrongdoing.
These—their reward is forgiveness from their Lord, and Gardens beneath which rivers flow, remaining in it forever. How excellent is the reward of the workers!
Many societies have passed away before you. So travel the earth, and note the fate of the deniers.
This is a proclamation to humanity; and guidance and advice for the righteous.
And do not waver, nor be sad. You are the superior ones—if you are believers.
If an injury has afflicted you, a similar injury has afflicted the others. Such days We alternate between people, so that Allah may know those who believe, and to take witnesses from among you. Allah does not love the wrongdoers.
So that Allah may refine those who believe, and to wipe out the unbelievers.
Or do you expect to enter Paradise, before Allah has recognized those among you who strive, and before He has recognized the patient?
And you used to wish for death before you have faced it. Now you have seen it with your own eyes.
Muhammad is no more than a messenger. Messengers have passed before him. If he dies or gets killed, will you turn on your heels? He who turns on his heels will not harm Allah in any way. And Allah will reward the appreciative.
No soul can die except with Allah’s permission, at a predetermined time. Whoever desires the reward of the world, We will give him some of it. And whoever desires the reward of the Hereafter, We will give him some of it. And We will reward the thankful.
How many a prophet fought alongside him, numerous godly people? They did not waver for what afflicted them in Allah’s path, nor did they weaken, nor did they give in. Allah loves those who endure.
Their only words were, “Our Lord, forgive us our offenses and our excesses in our conduct, and strengthen our foothold, and help us against the disbelieving people.”
So Allah gave them the reward of this world, and the excellent reward of the Hereafter. Allah loves the good-doers.
O you who believe! If you obey those who disbelieve, they will turn you back on your heels, and you turn losers.
Allah is your Master, and He is the Best of Victors.
We will strike terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve—because they attribute to Allah partners—a practice He never authorized. Their lodging is the Fire. Miserable is the lodging of the evildoers.
Allah has fulfilled His promise to you, when you defeated them by His leave; until when you faltered, and quarreled with one another about the matter, and disobeyed after He had shown you what you love. Among you are those who desire this world, and among you are those who desire the Hereafter. Then He turned you away from them, to test you; but He pardoned you. Allah is Gracious towards the believers.
As you were climbing, not caring for anyone, and the Messenger was calling you from behind you. Then He afflicted you with sorrow upon sorrow, so that you would not grieve over what you missed, nor for what afflicted you. Allah is well aware of what you do.
Then, after the setback, He sent tranquility down upon you. Drowsiness overcame some of you, while others cared only for themselves, entertaining wrong thoughts about Allah—thoughts of ignorance—saying, “Is anything up to us?” Say, “Everything is up to Allah.” They hide within themselves what they do not disclose to you. And they say, “If it was up to us, none of us would have been killed here.” Say, “Even if you were in your houses, those destined to be killed would have marched into their deathbeds.” Thus Allah tests what is within you, and He purifies what is in your hearts. Allah knows what the hearts contain.
Those of you who fled on the day the two groups met: it was Satan who caused them to backslide, on account of some of what they committed. But Allah has forgiven them. Allah is Forgiving, Clement.
O you who believe! Do not be like those who disbelieved, and said of their brethren who marched in the land, or went on the offensive, “Had they stayed with us, they would not have died or been killed.” So that Allah may make it a source of regret in their hearts. Allah gives life and causes death. Allah is Seeing of what you do.
If you are killed in the way of Allah, or you die—forgiveness and mercy from Allah are better than what they hoard.
Whether you die or get killed—to Allah you will be gathered.
It is by mercy from Allah that you were gentle with them. Had you been rude, hard-hearted, they would have dispersed from around you. So pardon them, and ask forgiveness for them, and consult them in the conduct of affairs. And when you make a decision, put your trust in Allah; Allah loves the trusting.
If Allah supports you, there is none who can defeat you. But if He fails you, who is there to help you after Him? So in Allah, let the believers put their trust.
It is not for a prophet to act dishonestly. Whoever acts dishonestly will bring his dishonesty on the Day of Resurrection. Then every soul will be paid in full for what it has done, and they will not be wronged.
Is he who pursues Allah's approval like him who incurs Allah's wrath and his dwelling is Hell—the miserable destination?
They have different ranks with Allah, and Allah is Seeing of what they do.
Allah has favored the believers, as He raised up among them a messenger from among themselves, reciting to them His revelations, and purifying them, and teaching them the Scripture and Wisdom; while aforetime they were in obvious error.
And when a calamity befell you, even after you had inflicted twice as much, you said, “How could this be?” Say, “You brought it on yourselves.” Allah has power over all things.
What befell you on the day the two groups met was according to Allah's will; so that the believers may know.
And so that the hypocrites may know. And it was said to them, “Come, fight in the way of Allah, or defend yourselves.” They said, “If we knew how to fight, we would have followed you.” That day they were closer to disbelief than to belief, saying with their mouths what is not in their hearts. But Allah knows best what they hide.
Those who said of their brethren, as they stayed behind, “Had they obeyed us, they would not have been killed.” Say, “Avert death from yourselves, if you are truthful.”
Do not consider those killed in Allah’s way as dead. In fact, they are alive, with their Lord, provided for.
Delighting in what Allah has given them from His bounty, and happy for those who have not yet joined them from among those who remained behind—that they have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve.
Rejoicing in blessing from Allah, and bounty, and that Allah will not waste the reward of the faithful.
Those who responded to Allah and the Messenger, despite the persecution they had suffered; for the virtuous and the reverent among them is a great reward.
Those to whom the people said, “The people have mobilized against you, so fear them.” But it increased them in faith, and they said, “Allah is enough for us; He is the Excellent Protector.”
So they came back with grace from Allah, and bounty, untouched by evil. And they pursued what pleases Allah. Allah possesses immense grace.
That is only Satan sowing fear in his allies; so do not fear them, but fear Me, if you are believers.
And do not be saddened by those who rush into disbelief. They will not harm Allah a bit. Allah intends to give them no share in the Hereafter, and they will have a terrible punishment.
Those who purchase disbelief at the price of belief will not harm Allah a bit. They will have a painful punishment.
Let not those who disbelieve assume that We delay them for their own good. In fact, We only delay them so that they may increase in sinfulness. They will suffer a humiliating punishment.
Allah would not leave the believers as you are, without identifying the insincere from the sincere. Nor would Allah inform you about the future, but Allah chooses from among His messengers whom He wills. So believe in Allah and His messengers. And if you believe and protect yourselves, you will have a splendid reward.
Those who withhold what Allah has given them of his abundance should not consider it good for them. In fact, it is bad for them. They will be encircled by their hoardings on the Day of Resurrection. To Allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Aware of whatever they do.
Allah has heard the statement of those who said, “Allah is poor, and we are rich.” We will record what they said, and their wrongful killing of the prophets; and We will say, “Taste the suffering of burning.”
“That is because of what your hands have committed, and because Allah is never unjust towards the servants.”
Those who said, “Allah has made a covenant with us, that we shall not believe in any messenger unless he brings us an offering consumed by fire.” Say, “Messengers have come to you before me, with clear proofs, and with what you demanded; so why did you assassinate them, if you are truthful?”
If they accuse you of lying, messengers before you were accused of lying—they came with clear proofs, divine books, and the Luminous Scripture.
Every soul will taste death, and you will receive your compensation on the Day of Resurrection. Whoever is swayed from the Fire, and admitted to Paradise, has won. The life of this world is merely the enjoyment of delusion.
You will be tested through your possessions and your persons. And you will hear from those who received the Scripture before you, and from those who associated much abuse. But if you are patient and reverent, then that is a course worthy of resolve.
Allah received a pledge from those who were given the Scripture: “You shall proclaim it to the people, and not conceal it.” But they disregarded it behind their backs, and they sold it for a small price—miserable is the exchange they made.
Do not think that those who rejoice in what they have done, and love to be praised for what they have not done—do not think they can evade the punishment; they will have a painful punishment.
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Allah is Capable of all things.
In the creation of the heavens and the earth, and in the variation of night and day, are signs for the possessors of understanding.
Those who remember Allah while standing, sitting, and on their sides; and they reflect upon the creation of the heavens and the earth: “Our Lord, You did not create this in vain. Glory be to You! So protect us from the suffering of the Fire.”
“Our Lord, whomever You commit to the Fire, You have disgraced. The wrongdoers will have no helpers.”
“Our Lord, we have heard a caller calling to faith: `Believe in your Lord,' so we have believed. Our Lord, forgive us our sins, and remit our misdeeds, and make us die with the virtuous.”
“Our Lord, and give us what You have promised us through Your messengers, and do not shame us on the Day of Resurrection—You never break a promise.”
And so their Lord answered them: “I will not let the work of any worker among you, male or female, be in vain; you are one of another. For those who emigrated, and were expelled from their homes, and were persecuted in my Way, and fought and were killed: I will remit for them their sins, and I will admit them into Gardens beneath which rivers flow—a reward from Allah. With Allah is the most beautiful reward.”
Do not be impressed by the unbelievers’ movement through the land.
A brief enjoyment, then their dwelling is Gehenna—a dreadful dwelling.
As for those who reverence their Lord: for them are Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will stay forever—hospitality from Allah. What Allah possesses is best for the pure.
Among the People of the Scripture are those who believe in Allah, and in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed to them. They are humble before Allah, and they do not sell Allah’s revelations for a cheap price. These will have their reward with their Lord. Allah is quick in settling accounts.
O you who believe! Be patient, and advocate patience, and be united, and revere Allah, so that you may thrive.
O, people! Be conscious of your Lord, who created you from a single soul, and created its mate from it, and propagated from them countless men and women. And revere Allah whom you ask about, and family relations. Allah is Watchful over you.
And give orphans their properties, and do not substitute the bad for the good, nor consume their properties by combining them with yours, for that would be a grave sin.
If you fear you cannot act fairly towards the orphans—then marry the women you like—two, or three, or four. But if you fear you will not be fair, then one, or what you already have. That makes it more likely that you avoid bias.
And give women their dowries graciously. But if they willingly forego some of it, then consume it with enjoyment and pleasure.
And do not give the immature your money which Allah has assigned to you for support. But provide for them from it, and clothe them, and speak to them with kind words.
And test the orphans until they reach the age of marriage. If you find them to be mature enough, hand over their wealth to them. And do not consume it wastefully or recklessly before they grow up. The rich should not receive compensation, but the poor may charge fairly. When you hand over their wealth to them, have it witnessed for them. Allah suffices as a Reckoner.
Men receive a share of what the parents and relatives leave behind, and women receive a share of what the parents and relatives leave behind—be it little or much—a legal share.
If the distribution is attended by the relatives, the orphans, and the needy: offer them something from it, and speak to them kindly.
Those who are concerned about the fate of their weak children, in case they leave them behind, should fear Allah, and say appropriate words.
Those who consume the orphans’ wealth illicitly consume fire into their bellies, and they will roast in a Blaze.
Allah instructs you regarding your children: the male receives the equivalent share of two females. If they are daughters, more than two, they get two-thirds of what he leaves. If there is only one, she gets one-half. As for the parents, each gets one-sixth of what he leaves, if he had children. If he had no children, and his parents inherit from him, his mother gets one-third. If he has siblings, his mother gets one-sixth. After fulfilling any will or debt. Your parents and your children: you don’t know which of them are nearer to you in benefit. This is Allah's Law. Allah is Knowing and Judicious.
And you get one-half of what your wives leave: if they had no children. If they had children, you get one-fourth of what they leave. After fulfilling any will or debt. They get one-fourth of what you leave: if you have no children. If you have children, they get one-eighth of what you leave. After fulfilling any will or debt. If a man or woman leaves neither parents nor children, but has a brother or sister, each of them gets one-sixth. If there are more siblings, they share one-third. After fulfilling any will or debt, without prejudice. This is a will from Allah. Allah is Knowing and Clement.
These are the limits set by Allah. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, He will admit him into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to stay there forever. That is the ultimate attainment.
But whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger, and oversteps His limits, He will cast him into a Fire, to stay there forever, and he will suffer a humiliating punishment.
Those of your women who commit lewdness—you must have four witnesses against them, from among yourselves. If they testify, confine them to the homes until death claims them, or Allah makes a way for them.
And if two men among you commit it, punish them both. But if they repent and reform, then leave them alone. Allah is Redeemer, Mercy-Giver.
Allah accepts the repentance of those who commit evil in ignorance, then repent soon after. These—Allah will relent towards them. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
But repentance is not accepted from those who commit evils, until when death approaches one of them, he says, “Now I repent,” nor from those who die as unbelievers. These—We have prepared for them a painful punishment.
O you who believe! It is not lawful for you to inherit women against their will. And do not coerce them to take away some of what you had given them—unless they commit a proven adultery. And live with them in kindness. If you happen to dislike them, it may be that you dislike something in which Allah has placed much good.
And if you desire to take one wife in place of another, even if you have given one of them a fortune, take nothing back from it. Would you take it back fraudulently and sinfully?
And how could you take it back, when you have been intimate with one another, and they have received from you a firm commitment?
And do not marry women that your fathers married, except what previously took place. It is improper, indecent, and a bad practice.
Forbidden for you are your mothers, your daughters, your sisters, your paternal aunts, your maternal aunts, your brother's daughters, your sister's daughters, your foster-mothers who nursed you, your sisters through nursing, your wives' mothers, and your stepdaughters in your guardianship—born of wives you have gone into—but if you have not gone into them, there is no blame on you. And the wives of your genetic sons, and marrying two sisters simultaneously—except what previously took place. Allah is Oft-Forgiving, Most Merciful.
And all married women, except those you rightfully possess. This is Allah’s decree, binding upon you. Permitted for you are those that lie outside these limits, provided you seek them in legal marriage, with gifts from your property, seeking marriage, not prostitution. If you wish to enjoy them, then give them their dowry—a legal obligation. You commit no error by agreeing to any change to the dowry. Allah is All-Knowing, All-Wise.
If any of you lacks the means to marry free believing women, he may marry one of the believing maids under your control. Allah knows all about your faith. You are from one another. Marry them with the consent of their guardians, and give them their rightful compensations—to be protected—neither committing adultery nor taking secret lovers. When they are married, if they commit adultery, their punishment shall be half that of free women. That is for those among you who fear falling into decadence. But to practice self-control is better for you. Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
Allah intends to make things clear to you, and to guide you in the ways of those before you, and to redeem you. Allah is Most Knowing, Most Wise.
Allah intends to relent towards you, but those who follow their lusts desire you to turn away utterly.
Allah intends to lighten your burden—the human being was created weak.
O you who believe! Do not consume each other’s wealth illicitly, but trade by mutual consent. And do not kill yourselves, for Allah is Merciful towards you.
Whoever does that, out of hostility and wrongdoing, We will cast him into a Fire. And that is easy for Allah.
If you avoid the worst of what you are forbidden, We will remit your sins, and admit you through a Gate of Honor.
And do not desire what Allah has favored some of you above others. For men is a share of what they have earned, and for women is a share of what they have earned. And ask Allah of His favor. Allah has knowledge of all things.
To each, We have appointed beneficiaries for what parents and relatives leave behind. Those to whom you have given your oath, give them their share. Allah is Witness over all things.
Men are the caretakers of women, as Allah has given some of them an advantage over others, and because they spend from their wealth. The good women are loyal; guarding what Allah would have them guard. As for those from whom you fear treason: advise them, then abandon them in their beds, then discipline them. But if they obey you, seek no way against them. Allah is Sublime, Great.
If you fear a breach between the two, appoint an arbitrator from his family and an arbitrator from her family. If they desire reconciliation, Allah will restore harmony between them. Allah is Knowledgeable, Expert.
And worship Allah, and ascribe no partners to Him, and be good to the parents, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the poor, and the close neighbor, and the distant neighbor, and close friends, and the traveler, and your servants. Allah does not love the arrogant showoff.
Those who are stingy, and exhort people to stinginess, and conceal what Allah has given them from His grace. We have prepared for the unbelievers a humiliating punishment.
And those who spend their money to be seen by people, and believe neither in Allah nor in the Last Day. Whoever has Satan as a companion—what a bad companion.
What would they have lost, had they believed in Allah and the Last Day, and donated from what Allah has given them? Allah knows them well.
Allah never commits an atom's weight of injustice. And if there is a good deed, He multiplies it. And He gives, from His Presence, a grand compensation.
Then how will it be, when We bring a witness from every community, and We bring you as a witness against these?
On that Day, those who disbelieved and disobeyed the Messenger will wish that the earth was leveled with them. They will not be able to hide a single fact from Allah.
O you who believe! Do not approach the prayer while intoxicated, until you know what you say; nor after sexual orgasm—unless you are traveling—until you have bathed. If you are sick or traveling, or one of you has relieved himself, or you had intercourse with women, and cannot find any water, then purify yourselves with clean sand—wiping your faces and hands. Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.
Have you not considered those who were given a portion of the Scripture? They buy misguidance, and they wish you would lose the way.
But Allah best knows your enemies. Allah is a sufficient Protector, and Allah is a sufficient Supporter.
Among the Jews are some who take words out of context, and say, “We hear and we disobey,” and, “Hear without listening,” and, “Observe us.” Twisting with their tongues, and slandering the religion. Had they said, “We hear and we obey”, and “Listen”, and “Give us your attention,” it would have been better for them, and more appropriate. But Allah has cursed them for their disbelief. They do not believe, except a few.
O you who were given the Scripture! Believe in what We revealed, confirming what you have, before We obliterate faces and turn them inside out, or curse them as We cursed the Sabbath-breakers. The command of Allah is always done.
Allah does not forgive associating with Him, but He forgives anything less than that to whomever He wills. Whoever associates others with Allah has devised a monstrous sin.
Have you considered those who claim purity for themselves? Rather, Allah purifies whom He wills, and they will not be wronged a bit.
See how they fabricate lies about Allah. This in itself is a blatant sin.
Have you considered those who were given a portion of the Scripture? They believe in superstition and evil powers, and they say of those who disbelieve: “These are better guided on the way than the believers.”
Those are they whom Allah has cursed. Whomever Allah curses, you will find no helper for him.
Or do they have a share in sovereignty? If that was the case, they would not give people a speck.
Or do they envy people for what Allah has given them from His grace? We have given the House of Abraham the Book and Wisdom, and We have given them a great kingdom.
Among them are those who believed in it, and among them are those who held back from it. Hell is a sufficient Inferno.
Those who reject Our communications—We will scorch them in a Fire. Every time their skins are cooked, We will replace them with other skins, so that they taste the suffering. Allah is Most Powerful, Most Wise.
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will admit them into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, remaining there forever. They will have purified spouses, and We will admit them into abundant shade.
Allah instructs you to return trusts to their owners, and when you judge between people, to judge with justice. Excellent are Allah’s instructions to you. Allah is Hearing, Seeing.
O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and those in authority among you. If you dispute about anything, refer it to Allah and the Messenger, if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. That is best, and a most excellent resolution.
Have you not observed those who claim that they believe in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you, yet they seek tyrannical sources of legislation, despite being commanded to reject them? Satan wants to mislead them far away.
And when it is said to them, “Come to what Allah has revealed, and to the Messenger,” you see the hypocrites shunning you completely.
How about when a disaster strikes them because of what their hands have put forward, then they come to you, swearing by Allah: “We intended nothing but goodwill and reconciliation”?
They are those whom Allah knows what is in their hearts. So turn away from them, and counsel them, and say to them concerning themselves penetrating words.
We did not send any messenger except to be obeyed by Allah’s leave. Had they, when they wronged themselves, come to you, and prayed for Allah's forgiveness, and the Messenger had prayed for their forgiveness, they would have found Allah Relenting and Merciful.
But no, by your Lord, they will not believe, until they call you to arbitrate in their disputes, and then find within themselves no resentment regarding your decisions, and submit themselves completely.
Had We decreed for them, “Lay down your lives,” or, “Leave your homes,” they would not have done it, except for a few of them. Had they done what they were instructed to do, it would have been better for them, and a firmer confirmation.
And We would have given them, from Our presence, a rich compensation.
And We would have guided them on a straight path.
Whoever obeys Allah and the Messenger—these are with those whom Allah has favored—among the prophets, and the sincere, and the martyrs, and the upright. Excellent are these as companions.
This is the grace from Allah. Allah suffices as Knower.
O you who believe! Take your precautions, and mobilize in groups, or mobilize all together.
Among you is he who lags behind. Then, when a calamity befalls you, he says, “Allah has favored me, that I was not martyred with them.”
But when some bounty from Allah comes to you, he says—as if no affection existed between you and him—“If only I had been with them, I would have achieved a glorious victory.”
Let those who sell this life for the Hereafter fight in Allah’s way. Whoever fights in Allah’s way, and then is killed, or achieves victory, We will grant him an excellent compensation.
And why would you not fight in the way of Allah, and helpless men, and women, and children cry out, “Our Lord, save us from this town whose people are oppressive, and appoint for us from Your Presence a Protector, and appoint for us from Your Presence a Victor.”
Those who believe fight in Allah’s way, while those who disbelieve fight in the way of the rebellious. So fight Satan’s allies. Satan’s tactics are always weak.
Have you not considered those who were told, “Restrain your hands, and perform the prayer, and give charity regularly?” But when fighting was ordained for them, a faction of them feared people as Allah ought to be feared, or even more. And they said, “Our Lord, why did You ordain fighting for us? If only You would postpone it for us for a short while.” Say, “The enjoyment of this life is brief, but the Hereafter is better for the righteous, and you will not be wronged one bit.”
Wherever you may be, death will catch up with you, even if you were in fortified towers. When something good comes their way, they say, “This is from Allah.” But when something bad befalls them, they say, “This is from you.” Say, “All is from Allah.” What is the matter with these people, that they hardly understand a thing?
Whatever good befalls you, is from Allah. And whatever bad befalls you, is from yourself. We sent you to humanity as a messenger, and Allah is enough as Witness.
Whoever obeys the Messenger is obeying Allah. And whoever turns away—We did not send you as their keeper.
They profess obedience. But when they leave your presence, some of them conspire something different from what you said. But Allah records what they conspire. So avoid them, and put your trust in Allah. Allah is enough as Trustee.
Do they not ponder the Quran? Had it been from anyone other than Allah, they would have found in it many inconsistencies.
And when some news of security or alarm comes their way, they broadcast it. Had they referred it to the Messenger, and to those in authority among them, those who can draw conclusions from it would have understood it. Were it not for Allah’s blessing and mercy upon you: you would have followed Satan, except for a few.
So fight in the way of Allah; you are responsible only for yourself. And rouse the believers. Perhaps Allah will restrain the strength of those who disbelieve. Allah is Superior in Might, and More Punishing.
Whoever intercedes for a good cause, shares in it. And whoever intercedes for an evil cause, shares in its burdens. Allah is Controller over all things.
When you are greeted with a greeting, respond with a better greeting, or return it. Allah keeps count of all things.
Allah—there is no god except He. He will gather you on the Day of Resurrection—about which there is no doubt. And who is truer in speech than Allah?
What is the matter with you, divided into two groups regarding the hypocrites, when Allah Himself overwhelmed them because of what they did? Do you want to guide those whom Allah has misguided? Whomever Allah misguides—you will never find a path for him.
They would love to see you disbelieve, just as they disbelieve, so you would become equal. So do not befriend any of them, unless they emigrate in Allah’s way. If they turn away, seize them and execute them wherever you may find them; and do not take from among them allies or supporters.
Except those who join a people with whom you have a treaty, or those who come to you reluctant to fight you, or fight their own people. Had Allah willed, He would have empowered them, and they would have fought you. If they withdraw from you, and do not fight you, and offer you peace, then Allah assigns no excuse for you against them.
You will find others who desire to be secure from you, and secure from their own people. But whenever they are tempted into civil discord, they plunge into it. If they do not withdraw from you, nor offer you peace, nor restrain their hands, then seize them and execute them wherever you find them. Against these, We have given you explicit authorization.
Never should a believer kill another believer, unless by mistake. Anyone who kills a believer by mistake must set free a believing slave, and pay compensation to the victim’s family—unless they remit it as a charity. If the victim belonged to a people hostile to you, but is a believer, then the compensation is to free a believing slave. If he belonged to a people with whom you have a treaty, then compensation should be handed over to his family, and a believing slave set free. Anyone who lacks the means must fast for two consecutive months, by way of repentance to Allah. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
And whoever kills a believer intentionally, his penalty is Hell, where he will remain indefinitely. And Allah is angry with him, and has cursed him, and has prepared for him horrible suffering.
O you who believe! When you journey in Allah’s way, investigate, and do not say to him who offers you peace, “You are not a believer,” aspiring for the goods of this world. With Allah are abundant riches. You yourselves were like this before, and Allah bestowed favor on you—so investigate. Allah is aware of what you do.
Not equal are the inactive among the believers—except the disabled—and the strivers in Allah’s way with their wealth and their lives. Allah favors the strivers with their wealth and their lives above the inactive, by a degree. But Allah has promised good to both. Yet Allah favors the strivers, over the inactive, with an excellent reward.
Ranks from Him, and forgiveness, and mercy. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
While the angels are removing the souls of those who have wronged themselves, they will say, “What was the matter with you?” They will say, “We were oppressed in the land.” They will say, “Was Allah’s earth not vast enough for you to emigrate in it?” These—their refuge is Hell—a horrible destination.
Except for the weak among men, and women, and children, who have no means to act, and no means to find a way out.
These—Allah may well pardon them. Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.
Whoever migrates in Allah’s way will find on earth many places of refuge and plentitude. Whoever leaves his home, emigrating to Allah and His Messenger, and is overtaken by death, his compensation falls on Allah. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
When you travel in the land, there is no blame on you for shortening the prayer, if you fear that the unbelievers may attack you. The unbelievers are your obvious enemies.
When you are among them, and you stand to lead them in prayer, let a group of them stand with you, and let them hold their weapons. Then, when they have done their prostrations, let them withdraw to the rear, and let another group, that have not prayed yet, come forward and pray with you; and let them take their precautions and their weapons. Those who disbelieve would like you to neglect your weapons and your equipment, so they could attack you in a single assault. You commit no error if you are hampered by rain or are sick, by putting down your weapons, but take precautions. Allah has prepared for the unbelievers a demeaning punishment.
When you have completed the prayer, remember Allah—standing, or sitting, or on your sides. Then, when you feel secure, perform the prayer. The prayer is a duty on believers at appointed times.
And do not falter in the pursuit of the enemy. If you are aching, they are aching as you are aching, but you expect from Allah what they cannot expect. Allah is Knowledgeable and Wise.
We revealed to you the Book, in truth, so that you judge between people according to what Allah has shown you. And do not be an advocate for the traitors.
And ask Allah for forgiveness. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
And do not argue on behalf of those who betray their own selves. Allah does not love the deceitful sinner.
They hide from people, but they cannot hide from Allah. He is with them, while they plot by night with words He does not approve. Allah comprehends what they do.
Here you are, arguing on their behalf in the present life, but who will argue with Allah on their behalf on the Day of Resurrection? Or who will be their representative?
Whoever commits evil, or wrongs his soul, then implores Allah for forgiveness, will find Allah Forgiving and Merciful.
And whoever commits a sin, earns it against himself. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
And whoever commits a mistake, or a sin, and then blames it on an innocent person, has taken a slander and a blatant sin.
Were it not for Allah’s grace towards you, and His mercy, a group of them would have misled you. But they mislead only themselves, and they cannot harm you in any way. Allah revealed to you the Scripture and Wisdom, and He taught you what you never knew. Allah’s favor upon you is great.
There is no good in much of their secret talks, except for whoever advocates charity, or kindness, or reconciliation between people. Whoever does this, seeking Allah’s approval, We will grant him an excellent compensation.
Whoever makes a breach with the Messenger, after guidance has become clear to him, and follows other than the believers’ path, We will direct him in the direction he has chosen, and commit him to Hell—a terrible destination.
Allah does not forgive associating others with Him, but He forgives anything less than that, to whomever He wills. Whoever ascribes partners to Allah has gone far astray.
They invoke in His stead only females. They invoke none but a defiant devil.
Allah has cursed him. And he said, “I will take to myself my due share of Your servants.”
“And I will mislead them, and I will entice them, and I will prompt them to slit the ears of livestock, and I will prompt them to alter Allah’s creation.” Whoever takes Satan as a master, instead of Allah, has suffered an obvious loss.
He promises them, and he raises their expectations, but Satan promises them nothing but delusions.
These—their housing is Hell, and they will find no escape from it.
But as for those who believe and do righteous deeds, We will admit them into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will dwell forever. The promise of Allah is true—and who is more truthful in speech than Allah?
It is not in accordance with your desires, nor in accordance with the desires of the People of the Scripture. Whoever works evil will pay for it, and he will find no protector or helper for himself apart from Allah.
But whoever works righteousness, whether male or female, and is a believer—these will enter Paradise, and will not be wronged a bit.
And who is better in religion than he who submits himself wholly to Allah, and is a doer of good, and follows the faith of Abraham the Monotheist? Allah has chosen Abraham for a friend.
To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth, and Allah surrounds all things.
They ask you for a ruling about women. Say, “Allah gives you a ruling about them, and so does what is stated to you in the Book about widowed women from whom you withhold what is decreed for them, yet you desire to marry them, and about helpless children: that you should treat the orphans with fairness.” Whatever good you do, surely Allah knows it.
If a woman fears maltreatment or neglect from her husband, there is no blame on them if they reconcile their differences, for reconciliation is best. Souls are prone to greed. But if you are virtuous and reverent—Allah is Cognizant of what you do.
You will never be able to treat women with equal fairness, no matter how much you desire it. Do not be so biased as to leave another suspended. If you make amends and act righteously—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
And if they separate, Allah will enrich both from His abundance. Allah is Bounteous and Wise.
To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens, and whatever is on earth. We have instructed those who were given the Scripture before you, and you, to be conscious of Allah. But if you refuse—to Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens, and whatever is on earth. Allah is Beyond need, Praiseworthy.
To Allah belongs whatever is in the heavens, and whatever is on earth. Allah suffices as Manager.
If He so wills, He can do away with you, O people, and bring others, and Allah is capable of that.
Whoever desires the reward of this world—with Allah is the reward of this world and the next. Allah is Hearing, Seeing.
O you who believe! Stand firmly for justice, witnesses for Allah, even if against yourselves, or your parents, or your relatives. Whether one is rich or poor, Allah takes care of both. So do not follow your desires, lest you swerve. If you deviate or turn away—Allah is Aware of what you do.
O you who believe! Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and the Book He revealed to His Messenger, and the Book He revealed before. Whoever rejects Allah, His angels, His Books, His messengers, and the Last Day, has clearly gone far astray.
Those who believe, and then disbelieve, and then believe, and then disbelieve, and then increase in disbelief: Allah will not forgive them, nor will He guide them to a way.
Inform the hypocrites that they will have a painful punishment.
Those who take disbelievers as allies instead of believers. Do they seek glory in them? All glory belongs to Allah.
And He has revealed to you in the Book, that when you hear Allah’s revelations being rejected or ridiculed, do not sit with them until they engage in some other subject. Otherwise, you would be like them. Allah will gather the hypocrites and the unbelievers, into Gehenna, altogether.
Those who lie in wait for you: if you attain victory from Allah, they say, “Were we not with you?” But if the unbelievers get a turn, they say, “Did we not side with you, and defend you from the believers?” Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection, and Allah will give the unbelievers no means of overcoming the believers.
The hypocrites seek to deceive Allah, but He is deceiving them. And when they rise for prayer, they rise reluctantly, only to be seen by people, and seldom remembering Allah.
Wavering in between: neither with these nor with those. Whomever Allah sends astray—you will never find for him a way.
O you who believe! Do not take the disbelievers as protectors instead of believers. Do you want to give Allah a clear case against you?
The hypocrites will be in the lowest depths of the Fire, and you will find no helper for them.
Except those who repent, reform, and hold fast to Allah, and devote their faith entirely to Allah. These are with the believers, and Allah will grant the believers a magnificent reward.
What would Allah accomplish by your punishment, if you are thankful and faithful? Allah is Appreciative, Cognizant.
Allah does not like the public uttering of bad language—unless someone was wronged. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
If you let a good deed be shown, or conceal it, or pardon an offense—Allah is Pardoning and Capable.
Those who deny Allah and His messengers, and wish to differentiate between Allah and His messengers, and say, “We believe in some, and we reject some,” and wish to pursue a path in between.
These are the unbelievers, truly. We have prepared for the unbelievers a humiliating punishment.
As for those who believe in Allah and His messengers, and make no distinction between any of them—He will give them their rewards. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
The People of the Scripture challenge you to bring down to them a book from the sky. They had asked Moses for something even greater. They said, “Show us, Allah, plainly.” So the thunderbolt struck them for their wickedness. Then they took up the calf, even after the clear proofs came to them. Yet We pardoned that, and We gave Moses compelling proof.
And We raised the Mount above them in accordance with their covenant, and We said to them, “Enter the gate with humility,” and We said to them, “Do not violate the Sabbath”, and We received from them a solemn pledge.
But for their violation of their covenant, and their denial of Allah’s revelations, and their killing of the prophets unjustly, and for their saying, “Our minds are closed.” In fact, Allah has sealed them for their disbelief—so they do not believe, except for a few.
And for their faithlessness, and their saying against Mary a monstrous slander.
And for their saying, “We have killed the Messiah, Jesus, son of Mary, the Messenger of Allah.” In fact, they did not kill him, nor did they crucify him, but it appeared to them as if they did. Those who differ about him are in doubt about it. They have no knowledge of it, except the following of assumptions. They certainly did not kill him.
But Allah raised him up to Himself. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
There is none among the People of the Scripture but will believe in him before his death. And on the Day of Resurrection, he will be a witness against them.
Because of wrongdoing by the Jews, We denied them good things that were permitted for them; and for their deterring many from Allah’s path.
And for their taking usury, although they were forbidden it; and for their consuming people's wealth dishonestly. We have prepared for the faithless among them a painful punishment.
But those among them firmly rooted in knowledge, and the believers, believe in what was revealed to you, and in what was revealed before you; and the observers of prayers, and the givers of charity, and the believers in Allah and the Last Day—upon these We will bestow an immense reward.
We inspired you, as We inspired Noah and the prophets after him. And We inspired Abraham, and Ishmael, and Isaac, and Jacob, and the Patriarchs, and Jesus, and Job, and Jonah, and Aaron, and Solomon. And to David, We gave the Psalms.
Some messengers We have already told you about, while some messengers We never told you about. And Allah spoke to Moses in a conversation.
Messengers delivering good news, and bringing warnings, so that people may have no excuse before Allah after the coming of the messengers. Allah is Powerful and Wise.
But Allah Himself testifies to what He revealed to you. He revealed it with His knowledge. And the angels testify. And Allah suffices as Witness.
Those who disbelieve, and repel from Allah’s path, have gone far astray.
Those who disbelieve and transgress—Allah is not about to forgive them, nor will He guide them to any path.
Except to the path to Hell, where they will dwell forever. And that is easy for Allah.
O, people! The Messenger has come to you with the truth from your Lord, so believe: it is better for you. But if you disbelieve, to Allah belongs whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth. And Allah is Knowledgeable and Wise.
O People of the Scripture! Do not exaggerate in your religion, and do not say about Allah except the truth. Jesus Christ, son of Mary, is the Messenger of Allah, and His Word which He conveyed to Mary, and a Spirit from Him. So believe in Allah and His messengers, and do not say, “Trinity.” Refrain, for your own good. Allah is only One God. Glory be to Him—that He should have a child. To Him belongs everything in the heavens and on earth, and Allah is a sufficient Protector.
The Messiah did not refuse to be a servant of Allah, nor did the near angels. Whoever refuses His worship, and is too arrogant—He will gather them to Himself, all together.
But as for those who believe and perform righteous deeds, He will pay them their rewards in full, and He will increase them out of His bounty. But as for those who refuse and are too proud, He will punish them with agonizing punishment, and they will find no protector or helper for themselves apart from Allah.
O, people! Conclusive evidence has come to you from your Lord, and We sent down to you a brilliant light.
As for those who believe in Allah, and hold fast to Him, He will admit them into mercy and bounty from Him, and He will guide them to Himself along a straight path.
They ask you for a ruling. Say, “Allah gives you a ruling regarding the person who has neither parents nor children. If a man dies and leaves no children, and he had a sister, she receives one-half of his estate. And he inherits from her if she leaves no children. But if there are two sisters, they receive two-thirds of the estate. If the siblings are men and women, the male receives the share of two females.” Allah makes things clear for you, lest you err. Allah has knowledge of all things.
O you who believe! Fulfill your agreements. Livestock animals are permitted for you, except those specified to you; but not wild game while you are in pilgrim sanctity. Allah decrees whatever He wills.
O you who believe! Do not violate Allah’s sacraments, nor the Sacred Month, nor the offerings, nor the garlanded, nor those heading for the Sacred House seeking blessings from their Lord, and approval. When you have left pilgrim sanctity, you may hunt. And let not the hatred of a people who once barred you from the Sacred Mosque lead you to aggression. And cooperate with one another in virtuous conduct and reverence, and do not cooperate with one another in sin and hostility. And revere Allah. Allah is severe in retribution.
Prohibited for you are carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and animals over which any name other than Allah's was pronounced; also the flesh of strangled animals, or killed violently, or killed by a fall, or gored to death, or mangled by wild animals—unless you purify—and animals sacrificed on altars, and the practice of drawing lots. For it is immoral. This day, those who disbelieve have despaired of your religion, so do not fear them, but fear Me. This day, I have perfected your religion for you, and have completed My favor upon you, and have approved for you as a religion, Submission. But whoever is compelled by hunger, with no intent of wrongdoing, then surely Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
They ask you what is permissible for them. Say, “Permissible for you are all good things, including what trained dogs and falcons catch for you.” You train them according to what Allah has taught you. So eat from what they catch for you, and pronounce Allah’s name over it. And be cautious of Allah. Allah is Swift in reckoning.
This day, all good things are made lawful for you. And the food of those given the Scripture is lawful for you, and your food is lawful for them. So are virtuous believing women, and virtuous women from the people who were given the Scripture before you, provided you give them their compensations, and you take them in marriage, not in adultery, nor as mistresses. But whoever rejects faith, his works will be in vain, and in the Hereafter, he will be among the losers.
O you who believe! When you rise to perform the prayer, wash your faces, and your hands, and your arms to the elbows, and wipe your heads, and your feet to the ankles. If you had intercourse, purify yourselves. If you are ill, or on a journey, or one of you returns from the toilet, or you had contact with women, and cannot find water, then purify yourselves with clean sand by wiping your faces and hands with it. Allah does not intend to burden you, but He intends to purify you, and to complete His favor upon you, so you may be thankful.
And Remember Allah’s favor upon you, and His covenant which He covenanted with you, when you said, “We hear and we obey.” And remain conscious of Allah; surely Allah knows what the hearts contain.
O you who believe! Be upright to Allah, witnessing with justice. And let not hatred of any people prevent you from acting justly. Adhere to justice, for that is nearer to piety. And remember Allah. Allah is informed of what you do.
To those who believe and perform righteous deeds, Allah has promised forgiveness and a great reward.
As for those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations—these are the inmates of the Blaze.
O you who believe! Remember Allah's favor upon you; when certain people intended to extend their hands against you, and He restrained their hands from you. So reverence Allah, and in Allah let the believers trust.
Allah received a pledge from the Children of Israel. And We raised among them twelve leaders. And Allah said, “I am with you; if you perform the prayer, and pay the purifying alms, and believe in My messengers and support them, and lend Allah a loan of righteousness; I will remit your sins, and will admit you into Gardens beneath which rivers flow. But whoever among you disbelieves afterward, has strayed from the right way.”
Because of their breaking their pledge, We cursed them, and We hardened their hearts. They distort the meaning of the Word, and they disregarded some of what they were reminded of. You will always witness deceit from them, except for a few of them. But pardon them, and overlook. Allah loves the doers of good.
And from those who say, “We are Christians,” We received their pledge, but they neglected some of what they were reminded of. So We provoked enmity and hatred among them, until the Day of Resurrection. And Allah will inform them of what they used to craft.
O People of the Scripture! Our Messenger has come to you, clarifying for you much of what you kept hidden of the Scripture, and overlooking much. There has come to you, from Allah, a light and a clear Book.
Allah guides with it whoever follows His approval to the ways of peace, and He brings them out of darkness into light, by His will, and He guides them in a straight path.
They disbelieve those who say, “Allah is the Christ, the son of Mary.” Say, “Who can prevent Allah, if He willed, from annihilating the Christ Son of Mary, and his mother, and everyone on earth?” To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and everything between them. He creates whatever He wills, and Allah is Capable of everything.
The Jews and the Christians say, “We are the children of Allah and His beloved.” Say, “Then why does He punish you for your sins?” In fact, you are humans, from among those He created. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. To Allah belongs the dominion of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, and to Him is the journey’s end.
O People of the Scripture! Our Messenger has come to you, making things clear to you—after cessation of messengers—so that you cannot say, “No deliverer of good news has come to us, and no warner.” In fact, a deliverer of good news has come to you, and a warner. Allah is capable of everything.
When Moses said to his people, “O my people, remember Allah’s blessings upon you, when He raised up prophets among you, and made you sovereign, and gave you what He never gave anyone in the world.”
“O my people, enter the Holy Land, which Allah has destined for you, and do not turn back, lest you become losers.”
They said, “O Moses, there are brutal people in it. We will not enter it unless they leave it. If they leave it, then we will enter.”
Two men whom Allah had blessed among those who feared, said, “Go at them through the gate. And when you have entered it, you will be victorious. And put your trust in Allah, if you are believers.”
They said, “O Moses, we will not enter it, ever, as long as they are in it. So go—you and your Lord—and fight. We are staying right here.”
He said, “My Lord, I have control only over myself and my brother, so separate between us and between the disobedient people.”
He said, “It is forbidden for them for forty years. They will wander aimlessly through the land. So do not grieve over the defiant people.”
And relate to them the true story of Adam's two sons: when they offered an offering, and it was accepted from one of them, but it was not accepted from the other. He Said, “I will kill you.” He Said, “Allah accepts only from the righteous.”
“If you extend your hand to kill me, I will not extend my hand to kill you; I fear Allah, Lord of the Worlds.”
“I would rather you bear my sin and your sin, and you become among the inmates of the Fire. That is the recompense of the wrongdoers.”
Then His soul prompted him to kill his brother, and he killed him—and he became of the losers.
Then Allah sent a raven, scratching the ground, to show him how to cover his brother's corpse. He said, “Woe to me! I was unable to be like this raven and cover my brother's corpse.” So he became regretful.
Because of this, We ordained for the Children of Israel: that whoever kills a person—unless it is for murder or corruption on earth—it is as though he killed the whole of humankind; and whoever saves it, it is as though he saved the whole of humankind. Our messengers came to them with clarifications, but even after that, many of them continue to commit excesses in the land.
The punishment for those who fight Allah and His Messenger, and strive to work corruption on earth, is that they be killed, or crucified, or have their hands and feet cut off on opposite sides, or be banished from the land. That is to disgrace them in this life. And in the Hereafter, they will have a terrible punishment.
Except for those who repent before you apprehend them. So know that Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O you who believe! Be conscious of Allah, and seek the means of approach to Him, and strive in His way, so you may succeed.
As for those who disbelieve: even if they owned everything on earth, and the like of it with it, and they offered it to ransom themselves from the suffering of the Day of Resurrection, it would not be accepted from them. And they will have a painful punishment.
They will want to come out of the Fire, but they will not come out of it. And they will have a lasting punishment.
As for the male thief and the female thief, cut their hands as a penalty for what they have reaped—a deterrent from Allah. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
But whoever repents after his crime, and reforms, Allah will accept his repentance. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Do you not know that to Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth? He punishes whom He wills, and He forgives whom He wills. And Allah is Capable of everything.
O, Messenger! do not be saddened by those who hurry to disbelief—from among those who say with their lips, “We believe,” but their hearts have not believed; and from among the Jews—listeners to lies, listeners to people who never met you. They distort words from their places, and they say, “If you are given this, accept it, but if you are not given it, then beware.” Whomever Allah wills to divert, you have nothing for him from Allah. Those are they whose hearts Allah does not intend to purify. For them is a disgrace in this world. And in the Hereafter, they will have a tremendous punishment.
Listeners to lies, consumers of illicit earnings. If they come to you, judge between them, or stay away from them. If you stay away from them, they will not harm you whatsoever. But if you judge, judge between them equitably. Allah loves the equitable.
But why do they come to you for judgment, when they have the Torah, in which is Allah’s Law? Yet they turn away after that. These are not believers.
We have revealed the Torah, containing guidance and light. The submissive prophets ruled the Jews according to it, so did the rabbis and the scholars, as they were required to protect Allah’s Book, and were witnesses to it. So do not fear people, but fear Me. And do not sell My revelations for a cheap price. Those who do not rule according to what Allah revealed are the unbelievers.
And We wrote for them in it: a life for a life, an eye for an eye, a nose for a nose, an ear for an ear, a tooth for a tooth, and for wounds equal retaliation. But whoever forgoes it charitably, it will be an atonement for him. Those who do not judge according to what Allah revealed are the unjust.
In their footsteps, We sent Jesus son of Mary, fulfilling the Torah that preceded him. And We gave him the Gospel, containing guidance and light, and confirming the Torah that preceded him, and guidance and counsel for the righteous.
So let the people of the Gospel rule according to what Allah revealed in it. Those who do not rule according to what Allah revealed are the sinners.
And We revealed to you the Book, with the truth, confirming the Book that preceded it and superseding it. So judge between them according to what Allah revealed. And do not follow their desires over the truth that has come to you. For each of you, We have assigned a law and a method. Had Allah willed, He would have made you a single community, but He tests you through what He has given you. So compete in righteousness. To Allah is your return, all of you—then He will inform you regarding your differences.
And judge between them according to what Allah revealed. And do not follow their desires. And beware of them, lest they lure you away from some of what Allah has revealed to you. And if they turn away, know that Allah intends to strike them with some of their sins. In fact, a great many people are corrupt.
Is it the laws of the Age of Ignorance that they seek? And who is fairer in judgment than Allah, for a people who are certain?
O you who believe! Do not take the Jews and the Christians as allies—some of them are allies of one another. Whoever of you allies himself with them is one of them. Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
You will see those with sickness in their hearts racing towards them, saying, “We fear a turn of fortune will strike us.” But perhaps Allah will bring about victory, or some event of His making, and they will be regretful for what they hid within themselves.
Those who believe will say, “Are these the ones who swore by Allah with their most solemn oaths that they are with you?” Their works have failed, so they became losers.
O you who believe! Whoever among you goes back on his faith—Allah will bring a people whom He loves and who love Him—kind towards the believers, stern towards the unbelievers. They strive in Allah’s way, and they do not fear the blame of the critic. That is the grace of Allah—He gives it to whom He wills. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
Your allies are Allah, and His Messenger, and those who believe—those who pray regularly, and give regular charity, and bow down.
Whoever allies himself with Allah, and His Messenger, and those who believe—surely, the Party of Allah is the victorious.
O you who believe! Do not befriend those who take your religion in mockery and game—be they from among those who were given the Scripture before you, or from among the unbelievers. And reverence Allah, if you are believers.
When you make a call to prayer, they take it as a joke and a game. That is because they are people who do not reason.
Say, “O People of the Scripture! Are you vengeful towards us only because we believe in Allah, and in what was revealed to us, and in what was revealed previously, and because most of you are sinful?”
Say, “Shall I inform you of something worse than that by way of penalty from Allah? Whomsoever Allah has cursed and is angry at him, and He turned some of them into apes, and swine, and worshipers of false deities. These are in a worse situation, and further astray from the right way.”
And when they come to you, they say, “We have believed.” Although they have entered with disbelief, and they have departed with it. But Allah is fully aware of what they hide.
You see many of them competing in sin and hostility, and in the consumption of illicit earnings. Evil is what they do.
Why do the rabbis and the scholars not prevent them from speaking sinfully and from consuming forbidden wealth? Evil is what they have been doing.
The Jews say, “Allah’s Hand is shackled.” Shackled are their hands, and they are cursed for what they say. In fact, His hands are outstretched; He gives as He wills. Certainly, what was revealed to you from your Lord will increase many of them in defiance and disbelief. And We stirred among them enmity and hatred, until the Day of Resurrection. Whenever they ignite the flame of war, Allah extinguishes it. And they endeavor to work corruption on earth. Allah does not like the workers of corruption.
Had the People of the Scripture believed and been righteous, We would have remitted their sins, and admitted them into the Gardens of Delight.
Had they observed the Torah, the Gospel, and what was revealed to them from their Lord, they would have consumed amply from above them, and from beneath their feet. Among them is a conservative community, but evil is what many of them do.
O, Messenger! Convey what was revealed to you from your Lord. But if you do not, then you would not have delivered His message. And Allah will protect you from the people. Allah does not guide the unbelieving people.
Say, “O People of the Scripture! You have no basis unless you uphold the Torah, the Gospel, and what is revealed to you from your Lord.” But what is revealed to you from your Lord will increase many of them in rebellion and unbelief. So do not sorrow over the disbelieving people.
Those who believe, and the Jews, and the Sabians, and the Christians—whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day, and works righteousness—they have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve.
We made a covenant with the Children of Israel, and We sent messengers to them. But whenever a messenger came to them with what their souls did not desire, some of them they accused of lying, and others they put to death.
They assumed there would be no consequences, so they turned blind and deaf. Then Allah relented towards them, but then again many of them turned blind and deaf. But Allah is Seeing of what they do.
They disbelieve those who say, “Allah is the Messiah, the son of Mary.” But the Messiah himself said, “O Children of Israel, worship Allah—my Lord and your Lord. Whoever ascribes partners to Allah, Allah has forbidden him Paradise, and his dwelling is the Fire. There are no saviors for the wrongdoers.”
They disbelieve those who say, “Allah is the third in a Trinity.” But there is no god, except One God. If they do not refrain from what they say, a painful punishment will befall those among them who disbelieve.
Will they not repent to Allah, and seek His forgiveness? Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
The Christ son of Mary was no more than a messenger, before whom other Messengers had passed away, and his mother was a woman of truth. They both used to eat food. Note how We make clear the communications to them; then note how deluded they are.
Say, “Do you worship, apart from Allah, what can neither harm you nor benefit you?” But Allah: He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Say, “O People of the Scripture! Do not exaggerate in your religion beyond the truth, and do not follow the opinions of people who went astray before, and misled many, and themselves strayed off the balanced way.”
Cursed were those who disbelieved among the Children of Israel by the tongue of David and Jesus son of Mary. That is because they rebelled and used to transgress.
They would not prevent one another from the wrongs they committed. Evil is what they used to do.
You will see many of them allying themselves with the unbelievers. Terrible is what their souls prompts them to do. The wrath of Allah fell upon them. And in suffering, they will remain.
Had they believed in Allah and the Prophet, and in what was revealed to him, they would not have befriended them. But many of them are immoral.
You will find the most hostile towards the believers to be the Jews and those who associate. And you will find the nearest in affection towards the believers to be those who say, “We are Christians.” That is because among them are priests and pastors, and they are not arrogant.
And when they hear what was revealed to the Messenger, you see their eyes overflowing with tears, because of the truth they recognize. They say, “Our Lord, we have believed, so count us among the witnesses.”
“And why should we not believe in Allah, and in the truth that has come to us, and long for our Lord to include us in the company of the righteous people?”
So Allah will reward them for what they say: Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will stay forever. Such is the reward of the virtuous.
But as for those who disbelieve and deny Our messages: these are the inmates of the Inferno.
O you who believe! Do not prohibit the good things Allah has permitted for you, and do not commit aggression. Allah does not love the aggressors.
And eat of the lawful good things Allah has provided for you. And remain conscious of Allah, in Whom you are believers.
Allah does not hold you accountable for your unintended oaths, but He holds you accountable for your deliberate oaths. The atonement for it is by feeding ten needy people from the average of what you feed your families, or by clothing them, or by freeing a slave. Anyone who lacks the means shall fast for three days. This is the atonement for breaking your oaths when you have sworn them. So keep your oaths. Thus Allah makes clear His revelations to you, so you may give thanks.
O you who believe! Intoxicants, gambling, idolatry, and fortune-telling are abominations of Satan’s doing. So avoid them, so you may succeed.
Satan only desires to provoke enmity and hatred among you through intoxicants and gambling, and to deter you from the remembrance of Allah, and from prayer. Will you not give them up?
Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and be careful. If you turn away: know that Our Messenger’s duty is clear communication.
There is no blame on those who believe and perform righteous deeds for what they may have eaten, provided they are careful, and believe, and perform righteous deeds, then maintain piety and faith, then remain righteous and charitable. Allah loves the charitable.
O you who believe! Allah will test you with something of the game your hands and your spears obtain, so that Allah may know who fears Him at heart. Whoever commits aggression after that will have a painful punishment.
O you who believe! Do not kill game while you are in a state of pilgrim sanctity. Whoever kills it intentionally must compensate by offering its equivalence of livestock—as judged by two just men among you—as an offering brought to the Kaabah. Or he may atone by feeding the needy, or its equivalent in fasting, so that he may taste the consequences of his violation. Allah has forgiven what is past. But whoever relapses, Allah will take revenge on him. Allah is Almighty, Avenger.
Permitted for you is the catch of the sea, and its food—as sustenance for you and for travelers. But forbidden for you is hunting on land, while you are in a state of pilgrim sanctity. And be mindful of Allah, to Whom you will be gathered.
Allah has made the Kaabah, the Sacred House, a sanctuary for the people, and the Sacred Month, and the offerings, and the garlanded. So that you may know that Allah knows everything in the heavens and the earth, and that Allah is Cognizant of all things.
Know that Allah is severe in retribution, and that Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
The Messenger’s only duty is to convey. And Allah knows what you disclose and what you conceal.
Say: “Good and wicked are not equal, even though the abundance of wicked may impress you. So reverence Allah, O possessors of understanding, so that you may succeed.”
O you who believe! Do not ask about things, if disclosed to you, would trouble you. And if you inquire about them while the Quran is being revealed, they would become clear to you. Allah has pardoned this. Allah is Forgiving, Clement.
Some people before you asked about them, but then came to reject them.
Allah did not institute the superstitions of Bahirah, Saibah, Wasilah, or of Hami. But those who disbelieve fabricate lies against Allah, and most of them do not understand.
And when it is said to them, “Come to what Allah has revealed, and to the Messenger,” they say, “Sufficient for us is what we found our forefathers upon.” Even if their forefathers knew nothing, and were not guided?
O you who believe! You are responsible for your own souls. He who strays cannot harm you if you are guided. To Allah is your return, all of you, and He will inform you of what you used to do.
O you who believe! When death approaches one of you, let two just persons from among you act as witnesses to the making of a will, or two persons from another people if you are traveling in the land and the tragedy of death approaches you. Engage them after the prayer. If you have doubts, let them swear by Allah: “We will not sell our testimony for any price, even if he is a near relative, and we will not conceal Allah’s testimony, for then we would be sinful.”
But if it is discovered that they are guilty of perjury, then two others shall stand in their place, from among those responsible for the claim. And have them swear by Allah, “Our testimony is more truthful than their testimony, and we will not be biased, otherwise we would be unjust.”
This makes it more likely that they will give true testimony, fearing that their oaths may be refuted by subsequent oaths. So reverence Allah, and listen. Allah does not guide the disobedient people.
On the Day when Allah will gather the messengers, and say, “What response did you receive?” They will say, “We have no knowledge; it is You Who are the Knower of the unseen.”
Then Allah will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Remember My favor upon you, and upon your mother, how I supported you with the Holy Spirit. You spoke to the people from the crib, and in maturity. How I taught you the Scripture and Wisdom, and the Torah and the Gospel. And how you would mold from clay the shape of a bird, by My leave, and you would breathe into it, and it would become a bird, by My leave. And how you would heal the blind and the leprous, by My leave; and how you would revive the dead, by My leave. And remember that I restrained the Children of Israel from you when you came to them with the clear miracles, and those who disbelieved among them said, `This is nothing but obvious sorcery.'”
“And when I inspired the disciples: `Believe in Me and in My Messenger.' They said, `We have believed, so bear witness that We are submitters.'”
“And when the disciples said, 'O Jesus, son of Mary. Is your Lord able to send down a feast for us from heaven?' He said, 'Fear Allah—if you are believers.'”
They said, “We wish to eat from it, and to reassure our hearts, and to know that you have told us the truth, and to be among its witnesses.”
Jesus son of Mary said, “O Allah, our Lord! Send down to us a table from heaven, to be a celebration for us, for the first of us, and the last of us, and a sign from You, and provide for us, you are the Best of providers.”
Allah said, “I am sending it down to you. But whoever among you disbelieves thereafter, I will punish him with a punishment the like of which I punish no other being.”
And Allah will say, “O Jesus, son of Mary! Did you say to the people, ‘Take me and my mother as gods apart from Allah?’” He will say, “Glory be to You! It is not for me to say what I have no right to. Had I said it, You would have known it. You know what is within me, and I do not know what is within You. It is you who are the Knower of the hidden.
I only told them what You commanded me: ‘Worship Allah—my Lord and your Lord.’ And I was a witness over them, as long as I was among them. But when You took me back, You were the Watcher over them—You are Witness over all things.
If You punish them, they are Your servants; but if You forgive them: it is you who are the Mighty and Wise.”
Allah will say, “This is a Day when the truthful will benefit from their truthfulness.” For them are Gardens under which rivers flow, where they will remain forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. That is the supreme attainment.
To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and everything in them, and He is capable of everything.
Praise be to Allah: Who created the heavens and the earth, and made darkness and light. Yet those who disbelieve ascribe equals to their Lord.
It is He Who created you from clay, then specified a span—a span determined by Him. Yet you doubt.
He is Allah in the heavens and the earth. He knows your secret and what you make public, and He knows what you earn.
Never did a message from among their Lord’s messages come to them, but they turned away from it.
They denied the truth when it came to them; but soon will reach them the news of what they used to ridicule.
Do they not realize how many generations We destroyed before them? We had established them on earth more firmly than We established you, and We sent the sky pouring down abundant rain on them, and We made rivers flow beneath them. But We destroyed them for their sins, and We established other civilizations after them.
Had We sent down upon you a book on paper, and they had touched it with their hands, those who disbelieve would have said, “This is nothing but obvious magic.”
And they say, “Why was no angel sent down to him.” Had We sent down an angel, the matter would have been settled, and they would not be reprieved.
Had We made him an angel, We would have made him a man, and confused them when they are already confused.
Messengers before you were ridiculed, but those who mocked them became besieged by what they ridiculed.
Say, “Travel the earth, and observe the fate of the deniers.”
Say, “To whom belongs everything in the heavens and on earth?” Say, “To Allah.” He has inscribed mercy for Himself. He will gather you for the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. Those who lost their souls: they do not believe.
To Him belongs whatever rests during the night and the day. He is the Hearing, the Knowing.
Say, “Shall I take for myself a master other than Allah, Originator of the heavens and the earth, who feeds, and is never fed?” Say, “I am commanded to be the first of those who submit.” And do not be among the associators.
Say, “I fear, if I disobeyed my Lord, the punishment of a tremendous Day.”
Whoever is spared on that Day—He had mercy on him. That is the clear victory.
If Allah touches you with adversity, none can eliminate it except He. And if He touches you with good—He is Capable of everything.
He is the Dominant over His servants. He is the Wise, the Expert.
Say, “What thing is more solemn in testimony?” Say, “Allah is witness between me and you. This Quran was revealed to me, so that I may warn you with it, and whomever it may reach. Do you testify that there are gods with Allah?” Say, “I myself do not testify.” Say, “He is only One God, and I am innocent of your associations.”
Those to whom We gave the Scripture recognize it as they recognize their own children. But those who lost their souls do not believe.
Who does more wrong than someone who fabricates lies against Allah, or denies His revelations? The wrongdoers will not succeed.
On the Day when We gather them all together, then say to those who associated, “Where are your partners whom you claimed?”
Their only argument will be to say, “By Allah, our Lord, we were not associators.”
Look how they lied to themselves. And what they invented has abandoned them.
And among them are those who listen to you. And We place coverings over their hearts, leaving them unable to understand it, and deafness in their ears. Were they to see every sign, they would not believe in it. Until, when they come to you, to argue with you, those who disbelieve will say, “These are nothing but myths of the ancients.”
They keep others from it, and they avoid it themselves. They ruin none but themselves, but they are unaware.
If only you could see, when they are detained before the Fire; they will say, “If only we could be sent back, and not reject our Lord’s revelations, and be among the faithful.”
What they used to conceal before will become obvious to them. And even if they were to be sent back, they would return to what they were forbidden. They are liars.
And they say, “There is nothing but our worldly life, and we will not be resurrected.”
If only you could see, when they are stationed before their Lord. He will say, “Is this not real?” They will say, “Yes indeed, by our Lord.” He will say, “Then taste the suffering for having disbelieved.”
Losers are those who deny the meeting with Allah. Then, when the Hour comes upon them suddenly, they will say, “Woe to us, for having ignored it.” They will carry their burdens on their backs—dreadful is what they carry.
The worldly life is no more than play and distraction, but the Home of the Hereafter is better for those who are righteous. Do you not understand?
We know that what they say saddens you. It is not you that they deny—it is Allah's revelations that the wrongdoers reject.
Messengers were rejected before you, but they patiently endured rejection and persecution until Our help came to them. There can be no change to Allah’s Words. News of the Messengers has already reached you.
And if you find their rejection unbearable, then if you can, seek a tunnel into the earth, or a stairway to heaven, and bring them a sign. Had Allah willed, He would have gathered them to guidance—so be not of the ignorant.
Only those who listen will respond. As for the dead, Allah will resurrect them. Then to Him, they will be returned.
And they say, “Why a miracle is not sent down to him from his Lord?” Say, “Allah is Able to send down a miracle, but most of them do not know.”
There is no creature on land, nor bird flying with its wings, but are communities like yourselves. We neglected nothing in the Scripture. Then to their Lord, they will be gathered.
Those who reject Our revelations are deaf and dumb, in darknesses. Whomever Allah wills, He leads astray. And whomever He wills, He sets on a straight path.
Say, “Have you considered? if Allah's punishment came upon you, or the Hour overtook you, would you call upon any other than Allah, if you are truthful?”
In fact, it is Him you will call upon. And if He wills, He will eliminate what you called Him for, and you will forget what you idolized.
We sent messengers to communities before you, and We afflicted them with misfortunes and hardships, so that they may be humbled.
If only, when Our Might came upon them, they humbled themselves. But their hearts hardened, and Satan beautified for them what they were doing.
Then, when they disregarded what they were reminded of, We opened the gates of all things for them. Until, when they delighted in what they were given, We seized them suddenly; and at once, they were in despair.
Thus was cut off the last remnant of the people who did wrong. And praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds!
Say, “Have you considered? If Allah takes away your hearing and your sight, and He sealed your hearts, which god other than Allah would restore them to you?” Note how We vary the signs, yet they still turn away.
Say, “Have you considered? if Allah's punishment comes to you suddenly, or gradually, would any be destroyed except the wrongdoing people?”
We do not send messengers except as deliverers of good news and Warners. Whoever believes and reforms—no fear shall come upon them, nor shall they grieve.
But as for those who reject Our revelations—suffering will afflict them because of their defiance.
Say, “I do not say to you that I possess the treasuries of Allah; nor do I know the unseen; nor do I say to you that I am an angel. I only follow what is inspired in me.” Say, “Are the blind and the seeing equal? Will you not reflect?”
And warn with it those who fear being gathered before their Lord—they have no protector or intercessor besides Him—so perhaps they will be mindful.
And do not dismiss those who call upon their Lord, morning and evening, desiring His attention. You are not accountable for them whatsoever, nor are they accountable for you whatsoever. If you dismiss them, you become one of the wrongdoers.
Thus We test some by means of others, so that they may say, “Are these the ones Allah favored out of all of us?” Is Allah not aware of the appreciative?
When those who believe in Our revelations come to you, say, “Peace be upon you, your Lord has taken upon Himself mercy. Whoever among you does evil in ignorance, then repents afterward and reforms—He is Forgiving and Merciful.”
Thus We explain the revelations, and to expose the path of the criminals.
Say, “I am forbidden from worshiping those you invoke besides Allah.” Say, “I will not follow your desires, for then I would have gone astray, and I would not be among the guided.”
Say, “I stand upon clear evidence from my Lord, and you have rejected Him. I do not possess what you seek me to expedite. The decision belongs to Allah alone. He relates the truth, and He is the Best of Deciders.”
Say, “If I possessed what you seek me to expedite, the matter between you and me would have been settled. And Allah knows best the wrongdoers.”
With Him are the keys of the unseen—none knows them except He. And He knows everything on land and sea. Not even a leaf falls without His knowledge, nor a single grain in earth’s darkness, nor anything wet or dry—but is in a clear record.
It is He Who takes you by night, and He knows what you earn by day. Then He raises you up, so that a term appointed may be fulfilled. Then to Him is your return, and He will inform you of what you used to do.
He is the Dominant over His servants, and He sends guardians over you. Until, when death comes to one of you, Our envoys take him back, and they never neglect their duty.
Then they are returned to Allah, their True Master. Unquestionably, His is the command, and He is the Swiftest of reckoners.
Say, “Who saves you from the darkness of land and sea, when you call upon Him humbly and inwardly, ‘If only He saves us from this, we will be among the thankful’?”
Say, “It is Allah who saves you from it, and from every distress. Yet then you associate others with Him.”
Say, “He is Able to send upon you an affliction, from above you, or from beneath your feet, or divide you into factions, and make you taste the violence of one another. Note how We explain the revelations, so they may understand.”
But your people have rejected it, although it is the truth. Say, “I am not a keeper over you.”
For every happening is a finality, and you will soon know.
When you encounter those who gossip about Our revelations, turn away from them, until they engage in a different topic. But should Satan make you forget, do not sit after the recollection with the wrongdoing people.
The righteous are in no way accountable for them. It is a reminder, so that they may abstain.
And leave alone those who take their religion for play and pastime, and who are deluded by the worldly life. But remind with it, lest a soul becomes damned on account of what it has earned. It has no protector apart from Allah, nor any mediator. And even if it offers every equivalent, none will be accepted from it. These are the ones delivered to condemnation by their actions. They will have a drink of boiling liquid, and a painful punishment, because they used to disbelieve.
Say, “Shall we call upon besides Allah something that can neither benefit us nor harm us, and be turned back on our heels after Allah has guided us; like someone seduced by the devils and confused on earth, although he has friends calling him to guidance: 'Come to us'?” Say, “Allah’s guidance is the guidance, and we were commanded to surrender to the Lord of the Universe.”
“And to perform the prayers, and to revere Him. It is to Him that you will be gathered.”
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in truth. On the Day when He says: “Be,” it will be. His Word is the truth, and His is the sovereignty on the Day when the trumpet is blown. The Knower of secrets and declarations. He is the Wise, the Expert.
And when Abraham said to his father, Azar, “Do you take idols as gods? I see that you and your people are clearly misguided.”
Thus We showed Abraham the empire of the heavens and the earth, so that he may be of those with certainty.
When the night fell over him, he saw a planet. He said, “This is my lord!” But when it set, he said, “I do not like those that set.”
Then, when he saw the moon rising, he said, “This is my lord!” But when it set, he said, “If my Lord does not guide me, I will be of the misguided people.”
Then, when he saw the sun rising, he said, “This is my Lord!—it is the biggest.” But when it set, he said, “O my people, I am innocent of your idolatry.
I have turned my attention towards Him Who created the heavens and the earth—a monotheist—and I am not of the polytheists.”
And his people argued with him. He said, “Do you argue with me about Allah—when He has guided me? I do not fear whatever you associate with Him—unless my Lord wills. My Lord encompasses all things in Knowledge. Will you not be mindful?
And why should I fear the partners you ascribe, and you do not fear associating others with Allah—a practice He never authorized for you? Which side is more entitled to security, if you happen to know?”
Those who believe, and do not obscure their faith with wrongdoing—it is they who have security, and they are guided.
That was Our argument, which We gave to Abraham against his people. We elevate by degrees whomever We will. Your Lord is Wise and Informed.
And We bestowed upon him Isaac and Jacob—each of them We guided. And We guided Noah previously. And from his descendants: David, Solomon, Job, Joseph, Moses, and Aaron. Thus We reward the good-doers.
And Zechariah, John, Jesus, and Elias—each was among the upright.
And Ishmael, Elisha, Jonah, and Lot—each We favored above all other people.
And of their ancestors, and their descendants, and their siblings—We chose them, and We guided them on a straight path.
This is Allah’s guidance. He guides with it whom He wills of His servants. Had they associated, their deeds would have been in vain.
Those were the ones to whom We gave the Scripture, judgment, and prophethood. But if these reject them, We have entrusted them to a people who will not disbelieve in them.
They are those whom Allah has guided, so follow their guidance. Say, “I ask of you no compensation for it—it is only a reminder for all humankind.”
They do not appreciate Allah as He should be appreciated, when they say, “Allah did not reveal anything to any human being.” Say, “Who then revealed the Scripture that Moses brought—enlightenment and guidance for the people?” You put it on scrolls, displaying them while hiding much. And you were taught what you never knew—neither you nor your ancestors. Say, “Allah.” Then leave them toying away in their speculation.
This too is a Scripture which We revealed—blessed—confirming what preceded it, so that you may warn the Foremost of Cities and those around it. Those who believe in the Hereafter believe in it, and they are dedicated to their prayers.
Who does more wrong than someone who invents lies against Allah, or says, “It was revealed to me,” when nothing was revealed to him, or says, “I can reveal the like of what Allah revealed”? If only you could see the wrongdoers in the floods of death, while the angels with arms outstretched: “Give up your souls. Today you will be repaid with the suffering of shame for having said about Allah other than the truth, and for being too proud to accept His revelations.”
“You have come to Us individually, just as We created you the first time, leaving behind you everything We have provided you with. We do not see your intercessors with you—those you claimed were your partners. The bonds between you are now severed, and what you had assumed has failed you.”
It is Allah Who splits the grain and the kernel. He brings the living from the dead, and He brings the dead from the living. That is Allah—so how could you deviate?
It is He Who breaks the dawn. And He made the night for rest, and the sun and the moon with precision. Such is the design of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
And it is He Who made the stars for you, so you may be guided by them through the darkness of land and sea. We thus explain the revelations for people who know.
And it is He who produced you from a single being, then a repository, then a depository. We have detailed the revelations for people who understand.
And it is He who sends down water from the sky. With it, We produce vegetation of all kinds, from which We bring greenery, from which We produce grains in clusters. And date-palms with hanging clusters, and vineyards, and olives, and pomegranates—similar and dissimilar. Look at its fruit when it bears and it ripens. Surely in this are signs for people who believe.
Yet they attributed to Allah partners—the sprites—although He created them. And they pierced for Him sons and daughters, without any knowledge. Glory be to Him! Exalted is He, beyond what they describe.
The Originator of the heavens and the earth—how can He have a child, when He had no companion? He created everything, and He knows everything.
That is Allah, your Lord. There is no god except He, the Creator of all things. So worship Him. And He is the Maintainer of all things.
No vision can grasp Him, but His grasp is over all vision. He is the Subtle, the Expert.
Insights have come to you from your Lord. Whoever sees, it is to the benefit of his own soul. And whoever is blind, it is to its detriment. “And I am not a guardian over you.”
We thus diversify the revelations, lest they say, “You have studied,” and to clarify them for people who know.
Follow what was revealed to you from your Lord. There is no god except He. And turn away from the associators.
Had Allah willed, they would not have associated. We did not appoint you as a keeper over them, nor are you a manager over them.
And do not insult those they call upon besides Allah, lest they insult Allah out of hostility and ignorance. Thus We made attractive to every community their deeds. Then to their Lord is their return, and He will inform them of what they used to do.
And they swear by Allah, with their most solemn oaths, that if a miracle were to come to them, they would believe in it. Say, “Miracles are only with Allah.” And what will make you realize, that even if they were to come, they would still not believe?
And We turn away their hearts and their visions, as they refused to believe in it the first time, and We leave them blundering in their rebellion.
And even if We sent down the angels to them, and the dead spoke to them, and We gathered all things before them, they still would not believe, unless Allah wills; but most of them do not know.
And so We have assigned to every prophet an enemy—devilish humans and jinn—inspiring one another with elegant words of deception. Had your Lord willed, they would not have done it. So leave them to their deceit.
So that the hearts of those who disbelieve in the Hereafter may be receptive to it, and be pleased with it, and be persistent in whatever they pursue.
“Shall I seek a judge other than Allah, when it is He who revealed the Book to you, perfectly explained?” Those to whom We gave the Book know that it is the truth revealed from your Lord. So do not be of those who doubt.
The Word of your Lord has been completed, in truth and justice. There is no changing to His Words. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Were you to obey most of those on earth, they would misguide you from Allah's way. They follow nothing but speculation, and they only guess.
Your Lord knows best those who stray from His path, and He knows best the rightly guided.
So eat of that over which Allah’s Name has been pronounced: if you are believers in His messages.
And why should you not eat of that over which Allah’s Name is pronounced—when He has detailed for you what is prohibited for you—unless you are compelled by necessity? Many lead astray with their opinions, through lack of knowledge. Your Lord knows best the transgressors.
So abandon sin, outward and inward. Those who commit sins will be repaid for what they used to perpetrate.
And do not eat from that over which Allah’s Name was not pronounced, for it is an abomination. The devils inspire their followers to argue with you. And if you were to obey them, then you would be polytheists.
Is someone who was dead, and to whom We give life, making for him a light by which he walks among people, like someone in darkness from which he cannot emerge? Thus the doings of unbelievers are made to appear good to them.
And so We placed in every town its leading criminals, to conspire in it, but they conspire only against themselves, though they are unaware.
And whenever a Verse comes to them, they say, “We will not believe until we are given the like of what was given to Allah’s messengers .” Allah knows best where to place His message. Humiliation from Allah and severe punishment will afflict the criminals for their scheming.
Whomever Allah wills to guide, He expands his chest for submission. And Whomever He wills to lead astray, He makes his chest narrow and constricted, as if he were ascending up the sky. Thus Allah lays defilement upon those who do not believe.
This is the Path of your Lord—straight. We have explained the revelations in detail, for people who reflect.
For them is the Home of Peace with their Lord, and He is their Master, because of what they used to do.
On the Day when He gathers them together: “O assembly of demons, you have exploited multitudes of humans.” Their adherents among humankind will say, “Our Lord, we have benefited from one another, and now we have reached the term that you have appointed for us.” He will say, “The Fire is your residence, yours to stay in forever, except as Allah wills. Your Lord is Wise and Informed.
Thus We make some wrongdoers befriend one another, because of what they used to do.
“O assembly of demons and humans! Did not messengers come to you from among you, relating to you My messages, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?” They will say, “We testify against ourselves.” The world's life seduced them. And they will testify against themselves that they were unbelievers.
That is because your Lord would never destroy towns for their wrongdoing while their inhabitants are unaware.
To each are degrees in accordance with what they have done. And your Lord is not unaware of what they do.
Your Lord is the Rich Beyond Need, Full of Mercy. If He wills, He can do away with you, and substitute in your place whomever He wills, just as He produced you from the descendants of another people.
What you are promised is coming, and you cannot prevent it.
Say, “O my people! Work according to your ability, and so will I. You will soon know who will fare best in the end.” The wrongdoers will not succeed.
And they dedicate to Allah a share of the crops and the livestock He created, saying, “This belongs to Allah.” Or so they claim. “And this belongs to our idols.” But the share of their idols does not reach Allah, yet the share of Allah reaches their idols. Evil is the judgment they make!
Likewise, their idols entice many idolaters to kill their children, to lead them to their ruin, and confuse them in their faith. Had Allah willed, they would not have done it. So leave them to their fraud.
And they say, “These animals and crops are restricted; none may eat them except those we permit,” so they claim, and animals whose backs are forbidden, and animals over which they do not pronounce Allah’s Name—falsely attributing lies to Him. He will repay them for their lies.
And they say, “What is in the wombs of these animals is exclusively for our males, and prohibited to our wives.” But if it is stillborn, then they may all share it. He will repay them for their allegations. He is Wise and Knowing.
Lost are those who kill their children foolishly, out of ignorance, and make forbidden what Allah has provided for them—falsely attributing lies to Allah. They are lost. They are not guided.
It is He who produces gardens, both cultivated and wild, and date-palms, and crops of diverse tastes, and olives and pomegranates, similar and dissimilar. Eat of its fruit when it yields, and pay its due on the day of its harvest, and do not be excessive. He does not like the wasteful.
And among the livestock are some for transportation, and some for clothing. Eat of what Allah has provided for you, and do not follow Satan’s footsteps. He is to you an outright enemy.
Eight pairs: two of the sheep, and two of the goats. Say, “Did He forbid the two males, or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Inform me with knowledge, if you are truthful.”
And two of the camels, and two of the cows. Say, “Did He forbid the two males, or the two females, or what the wombs of the two females contain? Or were you present when Allah instructed you to this?” Who does more wrong than he who fabricates lies against Allah, in order to mislead people without knowledge? Allah does not guide the wicked people.
Say, “In what was revealed to me, I find nothing forbidden to a consumer who eats it, except carrion, or spilled blood, or the flesh of swine—which is impure—or a sinful offering dedicated to other than Allah. But if someone is compelled by necessity, without willfully disobeying or transgressing, then your Lord is Forgiving and Merciful.”
For the Jews, We forbade everything with undivided hoofs. As of cattle and sheep: We forbade them their fat, except what adheres to their backs, or the entrails, or what is mixed with bone. Thus We penalized them for their iniquity. And surely We are truthful.
If they accuse you of lying, say, “Your Lord is Possessor of limitless mercy, but His wrath cannot be averted from the guilty people.”
The polytheists will say, “Had Allah willed, we would not have practiced idolatry, nor our forefathers, nor would we have prohibited anything.” Likewise, those before them lied—until they tasted Our fury. Say, “Do you have any knowledge that you can produce for us? You follow nothing but assumptions, and you only lie.”
Say, “Allah has the most conclusive argument. Had He willed, He would have guided you all.”
Say, “Bring forward your witnesses who will testify that Allah has prohibited this.” If they testify, do not testify with them. And do not follow the whims of those who deny Our revelation, nor those who disbelieve in the Hereafter and equate others with their Lord.
Say, “Come, let me tell you what your Lord has forbidden you: that you associate nothing with Him; that you honor your parents; that you do not kill your children because of poverty—We provide for you and for them; that you do not approach indecencies, whether outward or inward; and that you do not kill the soul which Allah has sanctified, except in the pursuit of justice. All this He has enjoined upon you, so that you may understand.”
And do not approach the orphan’s property, except with the best intentions, until he has reached maturity. And give full weight and full measure, with equity. We never burden a soul beyond its capacity. And when you speak, be fair, even regarding a relative. And fulfill your pledge to Allah. All this He has enjoined upon you, so that you may be mindful.
This is My path, straight, so follow it. And do not follow the other paths, lest they divert you from His path. All this He has enjoined upon you, so that you may refrain from wrongdoing.
Then We gave Moses the Scripture, complete for the righteous, and explaining everything clearly, and guidance, and mercy, so they may believe in the meeting with their Lord.
This too is a blessed Scripture that We revealed. So follow it, and be righteous, so you may receive mercy.
Lest you say, “The Scripture was revealed to two parties before us, and we were unaware of their teachings.”
Or lest you say, “Had the Scripture been revealed to us, we would have been better guided than they.” Clarifications have come to you from your Lord, and guidance, and mercy. Who then does more wrong than he who denies Allah's messages and turns away from them? We will repay those who turn away from Our communications with the worst kind of punishment, because of their turning away.
Are they waiting for anything but for the angels to come to them, or for your Lord to arrive, or for some of your Lord’s signs to appear? On the Day when some of your Lord’s signs appear, no soul will benefit from its faith unless it had believed previously, or had earned goodness through its faith. Say, “Keep waiting! We too are waiting.”
As for those who divided their religion and became denominations: you have nothing to do with them. Their case rests with Allah. Then He will inform them of what they used to do.
Whoever brings a good deed will have ten times its like. And whoever brings a bad deed will be repaid only with its equivalent—and they will not be wronged.
Say, “My Lord has guided me to a straight path, an upright religion, the faith of Abraham the Monotheist—and he was not of the associators.”
Say, “My prayer and my worship, and my life and my death, are devoted to Allah, the Lord of the Universes.
There is no partner for Him. Thus I am commanded, and I am the first of the Submitters.”
Say, “Am I to seek a Lord other than Allah, when He is the Lord of everything?” No soul gets except its due, and none bears the burdens of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of your differences.
It is He who made you successors on the earth, and raised some of you above others in ranks, to test you through what He has given you. Your Lord is Swift in retribution, and He is Forgiving and Merciful.
Alif. Lam. Meem. Saad.
A Scripture was revealed to you, so let there be no anxiety in your heart because of it. You are to warn with it—and a reminder for the believers.
Follow what is revealed to you from your Lord, and follow no masters besides Him. Little do you reflect!
How many a town have We destroyed? Our Force came upon them by night, or while they were napping.
Their plea, when Our Force came upon them, was but to say, “Surely, we were wrongdoers.”
We will question those who received messengers, and We will question the messengers.
We will narrate to them with knowledge, as We were never absent.
The scales on that Day will be just. As for those whose scales are heavy: it is they who are the successful.
But as for those whose weights are light: it is they who have lost their souls by having treated Our revelations wrongfully.
We have established you on earth, and We placed means of livelihood for you in it. But rarely do you give thanks.
We created you, then We shaped you, then We said to the angels, “Bow down before Adam.” So they bowed down, except for Iblis. He was not among those who bowed down.
He said, “What prevented you from bowing down when I commanded you?” He said, “I am better than he: You created me from fire, and You created him from clay.”
He said, “Then go down from it! It is not for you to act arrogantly in it. So get out! You are one of the disgraced!”
He said, “Give me time, until the Day they are resurrected.”
He said, “You are of those given delay.”
He said, “Because you have lured me, I will ambush them on Your straight path.
Then I will come at them from their front, and from their back, and from their right, and from their left, and you will not find most of them thankful.”
He said, “Get out of it, despised and vanquished. Whoever among them follows you: I will fill Hell with you all.
And you, Adam, inhabit the Garden, you and your spouse, and eat whatever you please; but do not approach this tree, or else you will be sinners.”
But Satan whispered to them, to expose to them their nakedness, which was invisible to them. He said, “Your Lord only prohibited you from this tree so that you do not become angels or become immortals.”
And he swore to them, “I am a sincere advisor to you.”
So he lured them with deception. And when they tasted the tree, their nakedness became evident to them, and they began covering themselves with the leaves of the Garden. And their Lord called out to them, “Did I not prohibit you from this tree, and say to you that Satan is a sworn enemy to you?”
They said, “Our Lord, we have sinned against ourselves. Unless You forgive us and have mercy on us, we will be of the losers.”
He said, “Fall, some of you enemies to one another. And on earth, you will have residence and livelihood for a while.”
He said, “In it, you will live. And in it, you will die. And from it, you will be brought out.”
O children of Adam! We have provided you with clothing to cover your bodies, and for luxury. But the clothing of piety—that is best. These are some of Allah’s revelations, so they may take notice.
O Children of Adam! Let not Satan seduce you, as he drove your parents out of the Garden, stripping them of their garments to show them their nakedness. He sees you, him and his clan, from where you cannot see them. We made the devils friends of those who do not believe.
And when they commit an indecency, they say, “We found our parents doing it, and Allah commanded us to do it.” Say, “Allah never commands indecencies. Are you attributing to Allah what you do not know?”
Say, “My Lord commands justice, and to stand devoted at every place of worship. So call on Him, devoting your faith to Him alone. Just as He originated you, so you will return.”
Some He has guided, and some have deserved misguidance. They have taken the devils for masters instead of Allah, and they assume that they are guided.
O Children of Adam! Dress appropriately at every place of worship. And eat and drink, but do not be excessive. He does not like the extreme.
Say, “Who forbade Allah’s finery, which He has produced for His servants, and the delights of livelihood?” Say, “They are for those who believe, during this present life, but exclusively theirs on the Day of Resurrection.” Thus We detail the revelations for people who know.
Say, “My Lord has forbidden indecencies—open and secret—and sin, and unjustified aggression, and that you ascribe partners to Allah; a practice He never authorized; and that you say about Allah what you do not know.”
For every nation is an appointed time. When their time has come, they cannot delay it by one hour, nor can they advance it.
O Children of Adam! When messengers come to you, from among you, relating to you My revelations—whoever practices piety and reforms—upon them shall be no fear, nor shall they grieve.
But as for those who reject Our revelations, and are too proud to accept them: these are the inhabitants of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
Who does more wrong than he who invents lies about Allah, or denies His revelations? These—their share of the decree will reach them. Until, when Our envoys come to them, to take away their souls away, they will say, “Where are those you used to invoke besides Allah?” They will say, “They abandoned us.” And they will testify against themselves that they were faithless.
He will say, “Join the crowds of jinn and humans who have gone into the Fire before you.” Every time a crowd enters, it will curse its sister-crowd. Until, when they are all in it, the last of them will say about the first of them, “Our Lord, these are the ones who misled us, so inflict on them a double punishment in the Fire.” He will say, “For each is a double, but you do not know.”
The first of them will say to the last of them, “You have no advantage over us, so taste the pain for what you used to do.”
Those who reject Our revelations and are too proud to uphold them—the gates of Heaven will not be opened for them, nor will they enter Paradise, until the camel passes through the eye of the needle. Thus We repay the guilty.
For them is a couch of hell, and above them are sheets of fire. Thus We repay the wrongdoers.
As for those who believe and do righteous works—We never burden any soul beyond its capacity—these are the inhabitants of the Garden, remaining in it eternally.
We will remove whatever ill-feeling lies within their hearts. Rivers will flow beneath them. And they will say, “Praise be to Allah, Who has guided us to this. Had Allah not guided us, we would not have been guided. The messengers of our Lord did come with the truth.” And it will be announced to them, “This is the Garden, awarded to you for what you used to do.”
And the inhabitants of the Garden will call out to the inmates of the Fire: “We have found what our Lord promised us to be true; did you find what your Lord promised you to be true?” They will say, “Yes.” Then an announcer will announce in their midst: “The curse of Allah is upon the wrongdoers.”
“Those who hinder from Allah’s path, and seek to distort it, and deny the Hereafter.”
And between them is a partition, and on the Elevations are men who recognize each by their features. They will call out to the inhabitants of the Garden, “Peace be upon you.” They have not entered it, but they are eagerly hoping.
And when their eyes are turned towards the inmates of the Fire, they will say, “Our Lord, do not place us among the wrongdoing people”
And the dwellers of the Elevations will call out to men they recognize by their features, saying, “Your hoardings did not avail you, nor did your arrogance.”
“Are these the ones you swore Allah would never touch with mercy?” “Enter the Garden; you have nothing to fear, nor will you grieve.”
And the inmates of the Fire will call on the inhabitants of the Garden, “Pour some water over us, or some of what Allah provided for you.” They will say, “Allah forbade them to the unbelievers.”
Those who took their religion lightly, and in jest, and whom the worldly life deceived. Today, We will ignore them, just as they ignored the meeting on this Day of theirs, and because they used to deny Our revelations.
We have given them a Scripture, which We detailed with knowledge: guidance and mercy for people who believe.
Are they waiting for anything but its fulfillment? The Day when its fulfillment comes true, those who disregarded it previously, will say, “The messengers of our Lord did come with the truth. Do we have any mediators to mediate for us? Or, could we be sent back, to behave differently from the way we used to behave?” They have lost their souls, and what they used to invent has failed them.
Your Lord is Allah; He who created the heavens and the earth in six stages, then established Himself on the Throne. He makes the night overtake the day, as it pursues it persistently; and the sun, and the moon, and the stars are governed by His command. His is the creation, and His is the command. Blessed is Allah, Lord of all beings.
Call upon your Lord humbly and privately. He does not love the aggressors.
And do not corrupt on earth after its reformation, and pray to Him with fear and hope. Allah’s mercy is close to the good-doers.
It is He who sends the wind, ushering in His mercy. Then, when they have gathered up heavy clouds, We drive them to a lifeless land, and We cause rain to fall, and We produce every kind of fruit. Similarly, We bring out the dead—perhaps you will reflect.
And the fertile land yields its produce by the will of its Lord. But the infertile produces nothing but hardship and misery. Thus We vary the lessons for thankful people.
We sent Noah to his people. He said, “O my people! Worship Allah; you have no god other than Him. I fear for you the torment of a tremendous Day.”
The dignitaries among his people said, “We see that you are clearly misguided.”
He said, “O my people, I am not misguided, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds.”
“I am conveying to you my Lord’s messages, and I am advising you, and I know from Allah what you do not know.”
“Do you marvel that a reminder has come to you from your Lord, through a man from among you, to warn you, and to lead you to righteousness, so that you may receive mercy?”
But they denied him. So We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and We drowned those who rejected Our revelations. They were blind people.
And to Aad, their brother Hud. He said, “O my people! Worship Allah; you have no god other than Him. Will you not be cautious?”
The elite of his people who disbelieved said, “We see foolishness in you, and we think you are a liar.”
He said, “O my people! There is no foolishness in me, but I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds.
“I am delivering to you my Lord’s messages, and I am a trustworthy adviser to you.”
“Do you marvel that a reminder has come to you from your Lord, through a man from among you, to warn you? And remember that He made you successors after the people of Noah, and He increased you in stature. So remember Allah’s favors, so that you may prosper.”
They said, “Did you come to us to make us worship Allah alone, and abandon what our ancestors used to worship? Then bring upon us what you threaten us with—if you are truthful.”
He said, “Condemnation and wrath from your Lord have befallen you. Are you arguing with me about names, which you and your ancestors invented—a practice Allah never authorized? Just wait! I am waiting with you.”
So We saved him and those with him, by mercy from Us, and We uprooted those who rejected Our signs and were not believers.
And to Thamood, their brother Saleh. He said, “O my people! Worship Allah; you have no god other than Him. Clarification has come to you from your Lord. This is Allah’s female camel, as a sign for you. So leave her to graze on Allah’s earth, and cause her no harm, lest a painful punishment seizes you.”
“And remember how He made you successors after Aad, and He established you in the land. You make for yourselves mansions on its plains, and carve out dwellings in the mountains. So remember Allah’s benefits, and do not roam the earth corruptingly.”
The notables among his people, who were arrogant, said to the ordinary people who had believed, “Are you certain that Saleh is sent by his Lord?” They said, “We certainly believe in what he was sent with.”
Those who were arrogant said, “We reject what you believe in.”
So they hamstrung the female camel, defied the command of their Lord, and said, “O Saleh, bring upon us what you threaten us with—if you are one of the messengers.”
And the quake overtook them, and they became motionless bodies in their homes.
Then he turned away from them, saying, “O my people, I have conveyed to you my Lord’s message, and I have advised you, but you do not like sincere advisors.”
And Lot, when he said to his people, “Do you commit lewdness no people anywhere have ever committed before you?”
“You lust after men rather than women. You are excessive people.”
But his people's only response was to say, “Expel them from your town; they are purist people.”
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife; she was among those who lagged behind.
And We rained down on them a rain. So note the consequences for the guilty.
And to Median, their brother Shuaib. He said, “O my people! worship Allah! You have no god other than Him. Clear evidence has come to you from your Lord. Give full measure and weight, and do not cheat people out of their rights, and do not corrupt the land after its reformation. That is better for you—if you are believers.”
“And do not lurk on every trail, making threats, and turning away from Allah’s path those who believe in Him, and striving to distort it. And remember how you were few, and He made you numerous. And note the consequences for the corrupters.”
“Since some of you believe in what I was sent with, and some do not believe, be patient until Allah judges between us; for He is the Best of Judges.”
The notables among his people who were arrogant said, “O Shuaib, We will expel you from our town, along with those who believe with you, unless you return to our faith.” He said, “Even if we are unwilling?”
“We would be fabricating a lie against Allah were we to return to your faith after Allah has saved us from it. It is not for us to return to it, unless Allah, our Lord, wills. Our Lord encompasses everything in knowledge. In Allah, we place our trust. Our Lord, decide between us and our people with truth, You are the Best of deciders.”
The notables among his people who disbelieved said, “If you follow Shuaib, you will surely be losers.”
Thereupon, the quake struck them. And they became motionless bodies in their homes.
Those who rejected Shuaib—as if they never prospered there. Those who rejected Shuaib—they themselves were the losers.
So he turned away from them, saying, “O my people, I have delivered to you my Lord’s messages, and I have advised you, so how can I mourn over a disbelieving people?”
We sent no prophet to a town, but We afflicted its people with hardship and distress, so that they may be humbled.
Then, We substituted prosperity in place of hardship. Until, when they flourished, they said, “Adversity and prosperity have befallen our ancestors too.” So We seized them suddenly, while they were unaware.
Had the people of the towns believed and were cautious, We would have opened for them the blessings of heaven and earth. But they rejected the truth, so We seized them by what they were doing.
Do the people of the towns feel secure that Our Force will not come upon them by night, while they sleep?
Do the people of the towns feel secure that Our Force will not come upon them by day, while they play?
Do they feel secure from Allah’s planning? None feel secure from Allah’s planning except the losing people.
Does it not serve as guidance to those who inherited the land after its inhabitants, that if We will, We can strike them for their sins? And seal their hearts, so that they would not hear?
These towns: We narrate to you some of their stories. Their messengers came to them with clear signs, but they would not believe in what they rejected previously. Thus Allah seals the hearts of the unbelievers.
We found most of them untrue to their commitments. We found most of them corrupt.
Then, after them, We sent Moses with Our miracles to Pharaoh and his inner circle, but they treated them wrongfully. So consider how the workers of corruption fared in the end.
Moses said, “O Pharaoh, I am a messenger from the Lord of the Worlds.”
“I am obligated to say about Allah nothing but the Truth. I have come to you with clear proof from your Lord, so let the Children of Israel go with me.”
He said, “If you have come with a miracle, then present it, if you are truthful.”
So he threw his staff, and it was an apparent snake.
And He pulled out his hand, and it was white to the onlookers.
The notables among Pharaoh’s people said, “He is definitely a skilled magician.”
“He wants to evict you from your land, so what do you recommend?”
They said, “Put him off, and his brother, and send heralds to the cities.”
“And let them bring you every experienced magician.”
And the magicians came to Pharaoh, and said, “Surely there is a reward for us: if we are the victors.”
He said, “Yes, and you will be among those closest to me.”
They said, “O Moses! Either you throw, or we are the ones to throw.”
He said, “You throw!” And when they threw, they beguiled the people’s eyes, and intimidated them, and produced powerful magic.
And We inspired Moses: “Throw your cane.” And at once, it swallowed what they faked.
So the truth came to pass, and what they produced came to nothing.
There and then they were defeated and utterly reduced.
And the magicians fell down, prostrating.
They said, “We have believed in the Lord of the Worlds.”
“The Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
Pharaoh said, “Did you believe in Him before I have given you permission? This must be a conspiracy you schemed in the city, in order to evict its people. You will surely know.”
“I will cut off your hands and your feet on opposite sides. Then I will crucify you all.”
They said, “It is to our Lord that we will return.”
“You are taking vengeance on us only because we believed in our Lord’s signs when they have come to us.” “Our Lord! Pour down patience upon us, and receive our souls in submission.”
The chiefs of Pharaoh's people said, “Will you let Moses and his people cause trouble in the land, and forsake you and your gods?” He said, “We will kill their sons, and spare their women. We have absolute power over them.”
Moses said to his people, “Turn to Allah for help; and be patient. The earth belongs to Allah; He awards it to whomever He wills of His servants, and the future belongs to the righteous.”
They said, “We were persecuted before you came to us, and after you came to us.” He said, “Maybe your Lord will destroy your enemy, and make you successors in the land; then He will observe how you behave.”
And We afflicted the House of Pharaoh with drought, and a shortage of crops, so that they may take notice.
Whenever a good fortune came their way, they would say, “This is our due.” But whenever an affliction befell them, they would consider it an ill omen on account of Moses and those with him. In fact, their ill omen is with Allah, but most of them do not know.
And they said, “No matter what sign you bring us, to bewitch us with, we will not believe in you.”
So We let loose on them the flood, and the locusts, and the lice, and the frogs, and the blood—all explicit signs—but they were arrogant. They were a guilty people.
Whenever a plague befell them, they would say, “O Moses! Pray to your Lord on our behalf, by virtue of the covenant He made with you. If you remove the plague from us, we will believe in you, and send the Children of Israel with you.”
But when We removed the plague from them, for a term they were to fulfill, they broke their promise.
So We took vengeance on them, and We drowned them in the sea—because they rejected Our miracles, and were negligent of them.
And We made the oppressed people inherit the eastern and western parts of the land that We blessed. Thus the fair promise of your Lord to the Children of Israel was fulfilled, because of their endurance. And We destroyed what Pharaoh and his people had constructed, and what they had harvested.
And We delivered the Children of Israel across the sea. And when they came upon a people devoted to some statues of theirs, they said, “O Moses, make for us a god, as they have gods.” He said, “You are an ignorant people.”
“What these people are concerned with is perdition, and their deeds are based on falsehoods.”
He said, “Shall I seek for you a god other than Allah, when He has favored you over all other people?”
And when We saved you from Pharaoh’s people, who subjected you to cruel sufferings—killing your sons and sparing your women. In that was a severe trial from your Lord.
And We appointed for Moses thirty nights, and We completed them with ten. Thus the time appointed by his Lord was forty nights. Moses said to his brother Aaron: “Be my successor among my people, and be upright, and do not follow the way of the mischief-makers.”
And when Moses came to Our appointed meeting, and his Lord spoke to him, he said, “My Lord, show me, that I may look at you.” He said, “You will not see Me, but look at the mountain; if it stays in its place, then you will see Me.” But when his Lord manifested Himself to the mountain, He pulverized it, and Moses fell down unconscious. Then, when he recovered, he said, “Glory be to You, I repent to You, and I am the first of the believers.”
He said, “O Moses, I have chosen you over the people for My messages and My words. So hold firmly to what I have given you, and be of the thankful.”
And We inscribed for him in the Tablets all kinds of enlightenments—and the decisive explanation of all things. “Hold firmly to them, and exhort your people to adopt the best of them. I will show you the home of the sinners.”
I will turn away from My revelations those who behave proudly on earth without justification. Even if they see every sign, they will not believe in it; and if they see the path of rectitude, they will not adopt it for a path; and if they see the path of error, they will adopt it for a path. That is because they denied Our revelations and paid no attention to them.
Those who deny Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter—their deeds will come to nothing. Will they be repaid except according to what they used to do?
In his absence, the people of Moses adopted a calf made from their ornaments—a body that lowed. Did they not consider that it could not speak to them, nor guide them in any way? They took it for worship. They were in the wrong.
Later, when they regretted, and realized that they had erred, they said, “Unless our Lord has mercy on us, and forgives us, we will be among the losers.”
And when Moses returned to his people, angry and disappointed, he said, “What an awful thing you did in my absence. Did you abandon your Lord’s commandments so quickly?” And he threw down the Tablets, and he seized his brother by the head, dragging him towards himself. He said, “Son of my mother, the people overpowered me, and almost killed me, so let not the enemies gloat over me, and do not count me among the wrongdoing people.”
He said, “My Lord, forgive me and my brother, and admit us into Your mercy; for you are the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
Those who idolized the calf have incurred wrath from their Lord, and humiliation in this life. Thus We repay the innovators.
As for those who commit sins, and then repent afterward and believe—your Lord, thereafter, is Forgiving and Merciful.
And when the anger subsided in Moses, he picked up the tablets—in their transcript was guidance and mercy for those in awe of their Lord.
And Moses selected seventy men from his people for Our meeting. When the tremor shook them, he said, “My Lord, had You willed, You could have destroyed them before, and me as well. Will you destroy us for what the fools among us have done? This is only Your test—with it You misguide whomever You will, and You guide whomever You will. You are our Guardian, so forgive us, and have mercy on us. You are the Best of Forgivers.”
“And inscribe for us goodness in this world, and in the Hereafter. We have turned to You.” He said, “My punishment: I inflict it upon whomever I will, but My mercy encompasses everything. I will specify it for those who act righteously and practice regular charity, and those who believe in Our communications.”
Those who follow the Messenger, the Unlettered Prophet, whom they find described in the Torah and the Gospel in their possession. He directs them to righteousness, and deters them from evil, and allows for them all good things, and prohibits for them wickedness, and unloads the burdens and the shackles that are upon them. Those who believe in him, and respect him, and support him, and follow the light that came down with him—these are the successful.
Say, “O people, I am Allah’s Messenger to you all—He to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. There is no god except He. He gives life, and He causes death.” So believe in Allah and His Messenger, the Gentile Prophet, who believes in Allah and His Words. And follow him, so that you may be guided.
Among the people of Moses is a community that guides by truth, and thereby establishes justice.
And We divided them into twelve tribal communities. And We inspired Moses when his people asked him for something to drink: “Strike the rock with your cane.” And twelve springs gushed from it. Each tribe recognized its drinking-place. And We shaded them with clouds, and We sent down upon them manna and quails: “Eat of the good things We have provided for you.” They did not wrong Us, but they used to wrong themselves.
And it was said to them, “Settle this town, and eat there whatever you please, and speak modestly, and enter the gate in humility—We will forgive your sins, and promote the good-doers.”
But the wicked among them substituted other words for the words given to them; so We sent down on them a plague from the sky, because of their wrongdoing.
And ask them about the town by the sea, when they violated the Sabbath. When they observed the Sabbath, their fish would come to them surfacing. But when they violated the Sabbath, they would not come to them. Thus We tried them because they disobeyed.
And when a group of them said, “Why do you counsel a people whom Allah will annihilate, or punish with a severe punishment?” They said, “As an excuse before your Lord, and so they may abstain.”
And when they neglected what they were reminded of, We saved those who prohibited evil, and We seized those who did wrong with a terrible punishment—because of their sinfulness.
And when they stubbornly rebelled against the command to refrain, We said to them, “Be despicable apes.”
Your Lord has announced, that He would send against them, until the Day of Resurrection, those who would inflict terrible suffering on them. Your Lord is swift in retribution, and He is Forgiving and Merciful.
And We scattered them into communities on earth. Some of them are righteous, and some of them short of that. And We tested them with fortunes and misfortunes, so they may return.
They were succeeded by generations who inherited the Scripture. They indulged in unlawful gains, claiming, “We will be forgiven.” And should similar gain come their way, they would seize it. Did they not make a covenant to uphold the Scripture, and to not say about Allah except the truth? Did they not study its contents? But the Home of the Hereafter is better for the cautious. Do you not understand?
As for those who adhere to the Scripture, and practice prayer—We will not waste the reward of the reformers.
And when We suspended the Mount over them, as if it were a shadow, and they thought it would fall on them: “Hold firmly to what We have given you, and remember what it contains, so that you may be protected.”
And when Your Lord summoned the descendants of Adam, and He made them testify about themselves. “Am I not your Lord?” They said, “Yes, You are, we testify.” Thus you cannot say on the Day of Resurrection, “We were not aware of this.”
Nor can you say, “Our ancestors practiced idolatry before, and we are their descendants who came after them. Will you destroy us for what the falsifiers have done?”
We thus elaborate the revelations, so that they may return.
And relate to them the story of him to whom We delivered Our messages, but he detached himself from them, so Satan went after him, and he became one of the deviant.
Had We willed, We would have elevated him through them, but he clung to the earth, and he followed his desires. His metaphor is that of a dog: if you chase after him, he pants, and if you leave him alone, he pants. That is the metaphor of the people who deny Our communications. So tell the stories, so perhaps they will reflect.
Terrible is the metaphor of the people who reject Our communications and wrong themselves.
Whomever Allah guides is the guided one. And whomever He sends astray—these are the losers.
We have destined for Hell multitudes of jinn and humans. They have hearts they do not understand with. And they have eyes they do not see with. And they have ears they do not hear with. These are like cattle. In fact, they are further astray. These are the oblivious.
To Allah belong the Most Beautiful Names; so call on Him by them, and disregard those who blaspheme His names. They will be repaid for what they used to do.
And among those We created is a community that guides by truth, and establishes justice accordingly.
As for those who reject Our messages: We will lead them gradually, in ways they cannot comprehend.
And I will give them more time. My plan is firm.
Did they not think? There is no madness in their friend. He is but a clear warner.
Have they not observed the government of the heavens and the earth, and all the things that Allah created, and that their time may have drawn near? Which message, besides this, will they believe in?
Whomever Allah misguides has no guide. And He leaves them blundering in their transgression.
They ask you about the Hour, “When will it be?” Say, “Knowledge of it rests with my Lord. None can reveal its timing, except He. It weighs heavily on the heavens and the earth. It will not come upon you except suddenly.” They ask you as if you are well informed about it. Say, “Knowledge of it rests with Allah,” but most people do not know.
Say, “I have no control over any benefit or harm to myself, except as Allah wills. Had I known the future, I would have acquired much good, and no harm would have touched me. I am only a warner, and a deliverer of good news to a people who believe.”
It is He who created you from a single being, and He made its mate from it, so that he may find comfort in her. Then, when he has covered her, she conceives a light load, and she carries it around. But when she has grown heavy, they pray to Allah their Lord, “If You give us a good child, we will be of the thankful.”
But when He has given them a good child, they attribute partners to Him in what He has given them. Exalted is Allah above what they associate.
Do they idolize those who create nothing, and are themselves created?
And can neither help them, nor help themselves?
And if you invite them to guidance, they will not follow you. It is the same for you, whether you invite them, or you remain silent.
Those you call upon besides Allah are worshipers like you. So call upon them, and let them answer you, if you are truthful.
Do they have feet with which they walk? Or do they have hands with which they grasp? Or do they have eyes with which they see? Or do they have ears with which they hear? Say, “Call upon your partners, then plot against me, and do not wait.”
“My Master is Allah, Who sent down the Book, and He protects the righteous.”
Those you call upon besides Him cannot help you, nor can they help themselves.
And if you call them to guidance, they will not hear. And you see them looking at you, yet they do not see.
Be tolerant, and command decency, and avoid the ignorant.
And when a temptation from Satan assails you, take refuge with Allah. He is Hearing and Knowing.
Those who are righteous: when an impulse from Satan strikes them, they remind themselves, and immediately see clearly.
But their brethren lead them relentlessly into error, and they never stop short.
And if you do not produce a miracle for them, they say, “Why don’t you improvise one?” Say, “I only follow what is inspired in me from my Lord.” These are insights from your Lord, and guidance and mercy, for people who believe.
And when the Quran is read, listen to it, and pay attention, so that you may experience mercy.
And remember your Lord within yourself, with humility and reverence, and quietly, in the morning and the evening, and do not be of the neglectful.
Those in the presence of your Lord are never proud to worship Him. They recite His praises. And to Him, they bow down.
They ask you about the bounties. Say, “The bounties are for Allah and the Messenger.” So remain conscious of Allah, and settle your differences, and obey Allah and His Messenger, if you are believers.
Believers are those whose hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, and when His revelations are recited to them, they strengthen them in faith, and upon their Lord, they rely.
Those who perform the prayer; and from Our provisions to them, they spend.
These are the true believers. They have a high standing with their Lord, and forgiveness, and a generous provision.
Even as your Lord brought you out of your home for a just cause, some believers were against it.
Arguing with you about the truth after it was made clear—as if they are driven to death as they looked on.
Allah has promised you one of the two groups—that it would be yours—but you wanted the unarmed group to be yours. Allah intends to establish the truth with His words, and to uproot the disbelievers.
In order to establish the truth, and to nullify falsehood, even to the dismay of the guilty.
When you appealed to your Lord for help, He answered you, “I am reinforcing you with one thousand angels in formation.”
Allah only made it a message of hope, and to set your hearts at rest. Victory comes only from Allah. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
He caused drowsiness to overcome you, as serenity from Him. And He sent down upon you water from the sky, to cleanse you with it, and to rid you of Satan’s pollution, and to fortify your hearts, and to strengthen your foothold.
Your Lord inspired the angels: “I am with you, so strengthen those who believe. I will strike terror into the hearts of those who disbelieve. So strike above the necks, and strike off every fingertip of theirs.”
That is because they defied Allah and His Messenger. Whoever defies Allah and His Messenger—Allah is severe in retribution.
“Thus it is. So taste it.” For the disbelievers, there is the suffering of the Fire.
O you who believe! When you face those who disbelieve on the march, never turn your backs on them.
Anyone who turns his back on them on that Day, except while maneuvering for battle, or to join another group, has incurred wrath from Allah, and his home is Hell—a terrible destination.
It was not you who killed them, but it was Allah who killed them. Nor was it you who launched when you launched, but it was Allah who launched. So that He may bestow upon the believers an excellent reward. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Such is the case. Allah undermines the strategy of the disbelievers.
If you seek victory, then victory has come to you. And if you abstain, it would be best for you. And if you return, We will return; and your troops, however numerous, will not benefit you whatsoever. Allah is with the believers.
O you who believe! Obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not turn away from him while you hear.
And be not like those who say, “We hear,” though they do not hear.
The worst of creatures to Allah are the deaf and dumb—those who do not reason.
Had Allah recognized any good in them, He would have made them hear. And had He made them hear, they would have turned away, defiantly.
O you who believe! Respond to Allah and to the Messenger when he calls you to what revives you. And know that Allah stands between a person and his heart, and that to Him you will be gathered.
And beware of discord which does not afflict the wrongdoers among you exclusively, and know that Allah is severe in retribution.
And remember when you were few, oppressed in the land, fearing that people may capture you; but He sheltered you, and supported you with His victory, and provided you with good things—so that you may give thanks.
O you who believe! Do not betray Allah and the Messenger, nor betray your trusts knowingly.
And know that your possessions and your children are a test, and that with Allah is an immense reward.
O you who believe! If you remain conscious of Allah, He will give you a criterion, and will remit from you your sins, and will forgive you. Allah is Lord of infinite bounty.
As the unbelievers plotted against you, to imprison you, or to kill you, or to exile you. They planned, and Allah planned, but Allah is the Best of planners.
And when Our revelations are read to them, they say, “We have heard. Had we willed, we could have said the like of this; these are nothing but myths of the ancients.”
And they said, “Our God, if this is the truth from You, then rain down on us stones from the sky, or bring upon us a painful affliction.”
But Allah will not punish them while you are among them. And Allah will not punish them while they ask for forgiveness.
And why should Allah not punish them, when they are preventing others from the Sacred Sanctuary, although they are not its custodians? Its rightful custodians are none but the reverent, but most of them do not know.
Their prayer at the House was nothing but whistling and clapping. So taste the punishment for having disbelieved.
Those who disbelieve spend their wealth to repel from Allah’s path. They will spend it, then it will become a source of regret for them, then they will be defeated. Those who disbelieve will be gathered into Hell.
So that Allah may separate the bad from the good, and heap the bad on top of one another, and pile them together, and throw them in Hell. These are the losers.
Say to those who disbelieve: if they cease, what is past will be forgiven them. But if they relapse—the practice of the ancients has passed away.
Fight them until there is no more persecution, and religion becomes exclusively for Allah. But if they cease—Allah is Seeing of what they do.
And if they turn away, know that Allah is your Protector. The Excellent Protector, and the Excellent Supporter.
And know that whatever spoils you gain, to Allah belongs its fifth, and to the Messenger, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the poor, and to the homeless, provided you believe in Allah and in what We revealed to Our servant on the Day of Distinction—the day when the two groups met. Allah is Capable of everything.
When you were on the nearer bank, and they were on the further bank, and the caravan was below you. Had you planned for this meeting, you would have disagreed on the timing. But Allah was to carry out a predetermined matter: so that those who perish would perish by clear evidence, and those who survive would survive by clear evidence. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Allah made them appear in your dream as few. Had He made them appear as many, you would have faltered, and disputed over the matter. But Allah saved the situation. He knows what is within the hearts.
When you met, He made them appear as few in your eyes, and He made you appear fewer in their eyes, so that Allah may conclude a predetermined matter. To Allah all matters revert.
O you who believe! When you meet a force, be firm, and remember Allah much, so that you may prevail.
And obey Allah and His Messenger, and do not dispute, lest you falter and lose your courage. And be patient; Allah is with the patient.
And be not like those who left their homes boastfully, only to be seen by people, and hindering others from Allah’s path. Allah comprehends what they do.
Satan made their deeds appealing to them, and said, “You cannot be defeated by any people today, and I am at your side.” But when the two groups faced off, he turned on his heels, and said, “I have nothing to do with you; I see what you do not see; I fear Allah; Allah is severe in punishment.”
When the hypocrites and those with sickness in their hearts, said, “These were deluded by their faith.” But whoever puts his trust in Allah—Allah is Powerful and Wise.
If only you could see, as the angels retrieve those who disbelieve, striking their faces and their backs: “Taste the agony of burning.”
“That is because of what your hands have committed, and because Allah is not unjust to the servants.”
Like the behavior of Pharaoh’s people, and those before them. They rejected Allah’s signs, so Allah seized them for their sins. Allah is Powerful, Severe in retribution.
That is because Allah never changes a blessing He has bestowed on a people, unless they change what is within themselves; and because Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Such was the case of Pharaoh’s people and those before them. They denied the signs of their Lord, so We destroyed them for their wrongs, and We drowned Pharaoh’s people—all were evildoers.
The worst of creatures in Allah's view are those who disbelieve. They refuse to believe.
Those of them with whom you made a treaty, but they violate their agreement on every occasion. They are not righteous.
If you confront them in battle, make a fearsome example of them, so that those who follow them may be deterred.
And if you fear treachery from a people, break off with them in like manner. Allah does not like the betrayers.
And let not the disbelievers assume that they are ahead. They will not escape.
And prepare against them whatever forces you can muster, and all the cavalry you can mobilize, to terrify thereby Allah’s enemies and your enemies, and others besides them whom you do not know, but Allah knows them. Whatever you spend in Allah’s way will be repaid to you in full, and you will not be wronged.
But if they incline towards peace, then incline towards it, and put your trust in Allah. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
And if they intend to deceive you—Allah is sufficient for you. It is He who supported you with His aid, and with the believers.
And He united their hearts. Had you spent everything on earth, you would not have united their hearts, but Allah united them together. He is Mighty and Wise.
O prophet! Count on Allah, and on the believers who have followed you.
O prophet! Rouse the believers to battle. If there are twenty persevering among you, they will defeat two hundred; and if there are a hundred of you, they will defeat a thousand of those who disbelieve; because they are a people who do not understand.
Allah has now lightened your burden, knowing that there is a weakness in you. If there are a hundred persevering among you, they will defeat two hundred; and if there are a thousand of you, they will defeat two thousand by Allah’s leave. Allah is with the patient.
It is not for a prophet to take prisoners before he has conquered the land. You desire the materials of this world, but Allah desires the Hereafter. Allah is Strong and Wise.
Were it not for a previous instruction from Allah, an awful punishment would have afflicted you for what you took.
So consume what you have gained, legitimate and wholesome; and remain conscious of Allah. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O prophet! Say to those you hold prisoners, “If Allah finds goodness in your hearts, He will give you better than what was taken from you, and He will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.”
But if they intend to betray you, they have already betrayed Allah, and He has overpowered them. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
Those who believed, and emigrated, and struggled in Allah’s cause with their wealth and their lives, and those who provided shelter and support—these are allies of one another. As for those who believed, but did not emigrate, you owe them no protection until they have emigrated. But if they seek your help in faith, you must come to their aid, except against a people with whom you have a treaty. Allah is Seeing of whatever you do.
As for those who disbelieve: they are allies of one another. Unless you do this, there will be turmoil in the land, and much corruption.
Those who believed, and emigrated, and struggled for Allah’s cause, and those who gave shelter and support—these are truly the believers. They will have forgiveness and a bountiful provision.
As for those who believed afterward and emigrated and struggled alongside you—these belong with you. But family relations have the strongest claim on one another in Allah’s book. Allah is Cognizant of all things.
A declaration of immunity from Allah and His Messenger to the associators with whom you had made a treaty.
So travel the land for four months, and know that you cannot escape Allah, and that Allah will disgrace the unbelievers.
And a proclamation from Allah and His Messenger to the people on the day of the Greater Pilgrimage, that Allah has disowned the polytheists, and so did His Messenger. If you repent, it will be better for you. But if you turn away, know that you cannot escape Allah. And announce to those who disbelieve a painful punishment.
Except for those among the idolaters with whom you had made a treaty, and have violated none of its terms, nor aided anyone against you. So fulfill your treaty with them to the end of its term. Allah loves the righteous.
Then, when the Sacred Months have passed, kill the polytheists wherever you find them. And capture them, and besiege them, and lie in wait for them at every ambush. But if they repent, and perform the prayers, and give the alms, then let them go their way. Allah is Most Forgiving, Most Merciful.
And if any of the associators seek asylum with you, give him asylum, so that he may hear the Word of Allah; then escort him to his place of safety. That is because they are a people who do not know.
How can the associators have a treaty with Allah and with His Messenger, except for those with whom you made a treaty at the Sacred Sanctuary? If they remain upright with you, remain upright with them. Allah loves the reverent.
How? When they overcome you, they respect neither kinship nor treaty with you. They satisfy you with lip service, but their hearts refuse, and most of them are immoral.
They traded away Allah's revelations for a cheap price, and barred others from His path—evil is what they used to do.
Towards a believer, they respect neither kinship nor treaty. These are the offenders.
But if they repent, and perform the prayers, and give the obligatory charity, then they are your brothers in faith. We detail the revelations for a people who know.
But if they violate their oaths after making a pledge, and attack your faith, then fight the leaders of disbelief—they have no oaths—so that they may cease.
Will you not fight a people who violated their oaths, and intended to expel the Messenger, and initiated hostilities against you? Do you fear them? It is Allah you should fear—if you are believers.
Fight them. Allah will punish them at your hands, and humiliate them, and He will help you against them, and will heal the hearts of a believing people.
And He will remove the rage of their hearts. Allah relents towards whomever He wills. Allah is Knowledgeable and Wise.
Or did you suppose that you would be left alone, while Allah has not yet identified those among you who strive and take no friend apart from Allah, His Messenger, and the believers? Allah is Expert at what you do.
It is not for the associators to attend Allah’s mosques while professing their disbelief against themselves. These—their deeds are void; and in the Fire, they will abide.
The only people to attend Allah’s mosques are those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and pray regularly, and practice regular charity, and fear none except Allah. These are most likely to be guided.
Or do you consider giving drink to the pilgrims and maintaining the Sacred House equal to those who believe in Allah and the Last Day and strive in Allah’s way? They are not equal in the sight of Allah. Allah does not guide the unjust people.
Those who believe, and migrate, and strive in Allah’s path with their wealth and their lives, are of higher rank with Allah. These are the winners.
Their Lord gives them the good news of mercy from Him, and acceptance, and Gardens where they will have lasting bliss.
To stay there forever. With Allah is a great reward.
O you who believe! Do not take your parents and your siblings for allies, if they prefer disbelief to belief. Whoever of you allies himself with them—these are the wrongdoers.
Say, “If your parents, your children, your siblings, your spouses, your relatives, the wealth you have acquired, business you worry about, and homes you love, are dearer to you than Allah, and His Messenger, and striving in His way, then wait until Allah brings about His judgment.” Allah does not guide the rebellious people.
Allah has given you victory in many regions; but on the day of Hunayn, your great number impressed you, but it availed you nothing; and the land, as spacious as it was, closed in on you; and you turned back in retreat.
Then Allah sent down His Tranquility upon His Messenger, and upon the believers. And He sent down forces you could not see, and He punished those who disbelieved. That is the payback of the disbelievers.
Then, after that, Allah relents towards whomever He wills. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O you who believe! The associators are polluted, so let them not come near the Sacred House after this year of theirs. And if you fear poverty, Allah will enrich you from His bounty, if He wills. Allah is Aware and Wise.
Fight those who do not believe in Allah and in the Last Day, and who do not forbid what Allah and His Messenger have forbidden, and who do not follow the Religion of Truth among those who were given the Scripture, until they pay the due tax with a willing hand, being compliant.
The Jews said, “Ezra is the son of Allah,” and the Christians said, “The Messiah is the son of Allah.” These are their statements out of their mouths. They emulate the statements of those who disbelieved before. May Allah fight them! How deluded they are!
They have taken their scholars and their priests as lords instead of Allah, and the Christ son of Mary. Although they were only commanded to worship one God. There is no god except He! Glory be to Him, above the partners they ascribe.
They want to extinguish Allah’s light with their mouths, but Allah refuses except to complete His light, even though the unbelievers hate it.
It is He Who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the religion of truth, to make it prevail over all religions, even though the associators hate it.
O you who believe! Many of the pastors and priests consume people's wealth illicitly and hinder from Allah’s path. Those who hoard gold and silver, and do not spend it in Allah’s way, inform them of a painful punishment.
On the Day when they will be heated in the Fire of Hell, then their foreheads, their sides, and their backs will be branded with it: “This is what you hoarded for yourselves; so taste what you used to hoard.”
The number of months, according to Allah, is twelve months—in the decree of Allah—the Day He created the heavens and the earth, of which four are sacred. This is the upright religion. So do not wrong yourselves during them. And fight the polytheists collectively, as they fight you collectively, and know that Allah is with the righteous.
The postponement is an increase in disbelief—by which the unbelievers are misled. They allow it one year, and forbid it another year, in order to conform to the number made sacred by Allah, thus permitting what Allah has forbidden. The bad of their deeds was beautified for them. Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
O you who believe! What is the matter with you, when it is said to you, “Mobilize in the way of Allah,” you cling heavily to the earth? Do you prefer the present life over the Hereafter? The enjoyment of the present life, compared to the Hereafter, is only a little.
Unless you mobilize, He will punish you most painfully, and He will replace you with another people; and you will not harm Him at all. Allah is capable of everything.
If you do not support him, Allah has already supported him, when those who disbelieved expelled him, and he was the second of two in the cave. He said to his friend, “Do not be sad, Allah is with us.” Then Allah made His tranquility descend on him, and He supported him with forces you did not see, and He made the word of those who disbelieve the lowest, while Allah’s Word is the Highest. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Mobilize, light or heavy, and strive with your wealth and your lives in Allah’s way. That is best for you—if you only knew.
Had the gain been immediate, and the journey shorter, they would have followed you. But the far distance was hard for them. Still, they swear by Allah: “Had we been able, we would have marched out with you.” They damn their own souls, and Allah knows that they are lying.
Allah pardon you! Why did you give them permission before it became clear to you who are the truthful ones, and who are the liars?
Those who believe in Allah and the Last Day do not ask you for exemption from striving with their wealth and their lives. Allah is fully aware of the righteous.
Only those who do not believe in Allah and the Last Day ask you for exemption. Their hearts are full of doubt, so they waver in their doubt.
Had they wanted to mobilize, they would have made preparations for it; but Allah disliked their participation, so He held them back, and it was said, “Stay with those who stay behind.”
Had they mobilized with you, they would have added only to your difficulties, and they would have spread rumors in your midst, trying to sow discord among you. Some of you are avid listeners to them. Allah knows the wrongdoers.
They tried to create conflict before, and they turned the issues for you; until the truth prevailed, and Allah’s command became evident—despite their dislike.
And among them is he who says, “Excuse me, and do not trouble me.” In fact, they have sunk into trouble. In fact, Hell will engulf the disbelievers.
If something good happens to you, it upsets them; and if a misfortune befalls you, they say, “We took our precautions in advance,” and they depart, happy.
Say, “Nothing will happen to us, except what Allah has destined for us. He is our Protector. So in Allah, let the believers trust.”
Say, “Are you expecting for us anything other than one of the two excellences? As for us: we are expecting that Allah will afflict you with a punishment from Him, or at our hands. So wait, we are waiting with you.”
Say, “Donate, willingly or unwillingly, it will not be accepted from you. You are disobedient people.”
What prevents the acceptance of their contributions is nothing but the fact that they disbelieved in Allah and His Messenger, and that they do not approach the prayer except lazily, and that they do not donate except resentfully.
Let neither their possessions nor their children impress you. Allah intends to torment them through them in this worldly life, then their souls depart while they are disbelievers.
And they swear by Allah, that they are of you. But they are not of you. They are a people in fear.
Were they to find a shelter, or a cave, or a hideout, they would rush towards it defiantly.
And among them are those who criticize you regarding charities. If they are given some of it, they become pleased; but if they are not given any, they grow resentful.
If only they were content with what Allah and His Messenger have given them, and said, “Allah is sufficient for us. Allah will give us from His bounty, as will His Messenger. Our desire is for Allah.”
Charities are for the poor, and the destitute, and those who administer them, and for reconciling hearts, and for freeing slaves, and for those in debt, and in the path of Allah, and for the homeless—an mandate from Allah. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Wise.
And among them are those who harass the Prophet, and say, “He is all ears.” Say, “He listens for your own good. He believes in Allah, he trusts the believers, and he is a mercy for those among you who believe.” Those who insult Allah’s Messenger will have a painful punishment.
They swear by Allah to you, to please you. But Allah and His Messenger are worthier of being pleased by them: if they are believers.
Do they not know that whoever opposes Allah and His Messenger, will have the Fire of Hell, remaining in it forever? That is the ultimate disgrace.
The hypocrites dread lest a chapter is revealed against them, informing them of what is in their hearts. Say, “Go on mocking; Allah will bring out what you dread.”
And if you question them, they will say, “We were just joking and playing.” Say, “Was it Allah, His revelations, and His Messenger that you ridiculed?”
Do not make excuses. You disbelieved after having believed. If We pardon some of you, We will punish others, because they are guilty.
The hypocrite men and hypocrite women are of one another. They advocate evil, and prohibit righteousness, and withhold their hands. They forgot Allah, so He neglected them. The hypocrites are the sinners.
Allah has promised the hypocrite men and hypocrite women, and the disbelievers, the Fire of Hell, remaining in it forever. It is their due. And Allah has cursed them, and they will have a lasting punishment.
Like those before you. They were superior to you in might, and more abundant in wealth and children. So they enjoyed their share, and you enjoyed your share, just as those before you enjoyed their share. And you indulged, as they indulged. It is they whose works will fail in this world and in the Hereafter. It is they who are the losers.
Did not the story of those before them reach them? The people of Noah, Aad, and Thamood, and the people of Abraham, the inhabitants of Median, and the Overturned Cities? Their messengers came to them with clear proofs. Allah never wronged them, but they used to wrong their own selves.
The believing men and believing women are friends of one another. They advocate virtue, forbid evil, perform the prayers, practice charity, and obey Allah and His Messenger. These—Allah will have mercy on them. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Allah has promised the believers, men and women, Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to stay there forever, and splendid homes in the Gardens of Eden. But approval from Allah is even greater. That is the supreme achievement.
O Prophet! Strive against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern with them. Their home is Hell—a miserable destination.
They swear by Allah that they said nothing, but they did utter the word of blasphemy, and they renounced faith after their submission. And they had ambitions they could not achieve. They were resentful only because Allah and His Messenger have enriched them out of His grace. If they repent, it will be better for them. But if they turn away, Allah will afflict them with a painful punishment—in this life and in the Hereafter—and on earth, they will have no protector and no helper.
And among them are those who pledge to Allah: “If He gives us from His grace, we will donate, and be of the upright.”
But when He gave them from His grace, they withheld it, and they turned away indifferently.
So He penalized them with hypocrisy in their hearts—until the Day they face Him—because they violated their pledge to Allah, and because they used to lie.
Do they not know that Allah knows their secrets and their conspiracies? And that Allah is the Knower of the unseen?
Those who criticize the believers for donating voluntarily, and ridicule those who find nothing to offer except their own efforts—Allah ridicules them—they will have a painful punishment.
Whether you ask forgiveness for them, or do not ask forgiveness for them. Even if you ask forgiveness for them seventy times, Allah will not forgive them. That is because they rejected Allah and His Messenger. Allah does not guide the immoral people.
Those who stayed behind rejoiced at their staying behind Allah’s Messenger. And they hated to strive with their wealth and their lives in Allah’s way. And they said, “Do not venture out in the heat.” Say, “The Fire of Gehenna is much hotter—if they only understood.”
So let them laugh a little, and weep much—in return for what they used to earn.
If Allah returns you to a group of them, and they ask your permission to go out, say, “You will not go out with me, ever, nor will you ever fight an enemy with me. You were content to sit back the first time, so sit back with those who stay behind.”
You are never to pray over any of them who dies, nor are you to stand at his graveside. They have rejected Allah and His Messenger, and they died while they were sinners.
Do not let their wealth and their children impress you. Allah intends to torment them through them in this world, and their souls expire while they are unbelievers.
And when a chapter is revealed: “Believe in Allah and strive with His Messenger,” the prominent among them ask you for exemption. They say, “Leave us to stay with those who stay behind.”
They prefer to be with those who stay behind. Their hearts were sealed, so they do not understand.
But the Messenger and those who believe with him strive with their possessions and their lives. It is they who will have the good things, and it is they who will prosper.
Allah has prepared for them Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to stay there forever. That is the ultimate victory.
Some Nomadic-Arabs came with excuses, seeking an exemption. While those who were untrue to Allah and His Messenger remained behind. A painful punishment will afflict those among them who disbelieved.
There is no blame on the weak, nor on the sick, nor on those who have nothing to contribute, provided they are true to Allah and His Messenger. In no way can the righteous be blamed. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Nor on those who approach you, wishing to ride with you, and you said, “I have nothing to carry you on.” So they turned away, with their eyes overflowing with tears, sorrowing for not finding the means to contribute.
Blame lies on those who seek exemption from you, although they have the means. They are content to stay with those who stay behind. Allah has sealed their hearts, and they do not realize.
They will offer you excuses when you return to them. Say, “Make no excuses; we do not believe you; Allah has informed us about you. And Allah will be watching your actions, and so will His Messenger. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the Known and the Unknown, and He will inform you of what you used to do.”
They will swear by Allah to you, when you return to them, that you may leave them alone. So leave them alone. They are despicable, and their destiny is Hell; a payback for what they used to do.
They swear to you, so that you may accept them. But even if you accept them, Allah does not accept the wicked people.
The Desert-Arabs are the most steeped in disbelief and hypocrisy, and the most likely to ignore the limits that Allah has revealed to His Messenger. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
And among the Desert-Arabs are those who consider their contribution to be a penalty. And they wait for a reversal of your fortunes. Upon them will fall the cycle of misfortune. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Yet among the Desert-Arabs are those who believe in Allah and the Last Day, and consider their contribution to be means towards Allah, and the prayers of the Messenger. It will surely draw them closer, and Allah will admit them into His mercy. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
The Pioneers—the first of the Migrants and the Supporters, and those who followed them in righteousness. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. He has prepared for them Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will abide forever. That is the ultimate triumph.
And among the Desert-Arabs around you, some are hypocrites, and also among the inhabitants of Medina. They have become adamant in hypocrisy. You do not know them, but We know them. We will punish them twice; then they will be returned to severe suffering.
And others have confessed their sins, having mixed righteous deeds with bad deeds. Perhaps Allah will accept their repentance. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Accept contributions from their wealth, to purify them and sanctify them with it—and bless them. Your prayer is a comfort for them. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
Do they not know that Allah accepts the repentance of His worshipers, and that He receives the contributions, and that Allah is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Merciful?
Say, “Act. Allah will see your actions, as will His Messenger and the believers. Then you will be returned to the Knower of secrets and declarations, and He will inform you of what you used to do.”
And others are held in suspense, awaiting the command of Allah, as to whether He will punish them, or relent towards them. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
Then there are those who establish a mosque to create trouble, and disbelief, and disunity among the believers, and as an outpost for those who fight Allah and His Messenger. And they swear: “Our intentions are nothing but good.” But Allah testifies that they are liars.
Do not stand in it, ever. A mosque founded upon piety from the first day is worthier of your prayers. In it are men who love to be purified. Allah loves those who purify themselves.
Is he who establishes his structure upon piety and acceptance from Allah better, or he who establishes his structure on the brink of a cliff that is about to tumble, and so it tumbles with him into the Fire of Hell? Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
The structure which they built will remain questionable in their hearts—until their hearts are stopped. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
Allah has purchased from the believers their lives and their wealth in exchange for Paradise. They fight in Allah’s way, so they kill and get killed. It is a promise binding on Him in the Torah, and the Gospel, and the Quran. And who is more faithful to his promise than Allah? So rejoice in making such an exchange—that is the supreme triumph.
Those who repent, those who worship, those who praise, those who journey, those who kneel, those who bow down, those who advocate righteousness and forbid evil, and those who observe the limits of Allah; and give good news to the believers.
It is not for the Prophet and those who believe to ask forgiveness for the associators, even if they were close relatives—after it has become clear to them that they are the inhabitants of the Blaze.
Abraham asked forgiveness for his father only because of a promise he had made to him. But when it became clear to him that he was an enemy of Allah, he disowned him. Abraham was caring and patient.
It is not for Allah to lead a people astray after having guided them—until He clarifies for them what they should guard against. Allah is Knower of all things.
To Allah belongs the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth. He gives life, and He causes death. And besides Allah, you have neither protector nor helper.
Allah has redeemed the Prophet, and the Emigrants, and the Supporters—those who followed him in the hour of difficulty—after the hearts of some of them almost swerved. Then He accepted their repentance. He is Kind towards them, Compassionate.
Also towards the three who were left behind. Then, when the earth, as vast as it is, closed in on them, and their souls closed in on them, and they realized that there was no refuge from Allah, except in Him, and He relented towards them, so that they may repent. Allah is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Most Merciful.
O you who believe! Be mindful of Allah, and be among the truthful.
It is not for the inhabitants of Medina and the Nomadic-Arabs around them to stay behind Allah’s Messenger, nor to prefer themselves to him. That is because they suffer no thirst, nor fatigue, nor hunger in the way of Allah, nor do they take one step that enrages the disbelievers, nor do they receive anything from an enemy, but it is recorded to their credit as a righteous deed. Allah does not waste the reward of the good-doers.
Nor do they spend an expenditure, small or large, nor do they cross any valley, but it is recorded for them. So that Allah may reward them in accordance with the best of their deeds.
It is not advisable for the believers to march out altogether. Of every division that marches out, let a group remain behind, to gain understanding in religion, and to notify their people when they have returned to them, so they may beware.
O you who believe! Fight those of the disbelievers who attack you, and let them find severity in you. And know that Allah is with the reverent.
And whenever a chapter is revealed, some of them say, “Which of you has this increased in faith?” As for those who believe: it increases them in faith, and they rejoice.
But as for those in whose hearts is sickness: it adds disgrace to their disgrace, and they die while they are unbelievers.
Do they not realize that they are tested every year, once or twice? But they do not repent, nor do they learn.
And whenever a chapter is revealed, they look at one another, “Does anyone see you?” Then they slip away. Allah has diverted their hearts, because they are a people who do not understand.
There has come to you a messenger from among yourselves, concerned over your suffering, anxious over your well-being. Kind and merciful towards the believers.
If they turn away, say, “Allah is enough for me. There is no god except He. In Him I trust. And He is the Lord of the Magnificent Throne.”
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the Verses of the Wise Book.
Is it a wonder to the people that We inspired a man from among them: “Warn the people. And give good news to those who believe that they are on a sound footing with their Lord?” The disbelievers say, “This is an obvious sorcerer.”
Your Lord is Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth in six days, then settled over the Throne, governing all things. There is no intercessor except after His permission. That is Allah, your Lord—so worship Him. Will you not reflect?
To Him is your return, altogether. The promise of Allah is true. He originates creation, then He repeats it, to reward those who believe and do good deeds with equity. As for those who disbelieve, for them is a drink of boiling liquid, and agonizing suffering, for having disbelieved.
It is He who made the sun radiant, and the moon a light, and determined its phases, so you may know the number of years and the calculation. Allah did not create all this except with truth. He details the revelations for people who know.
In the alternation of night and day, and in what Allah created in the heavens and the earth, are signs for people who are aware.
Those who do not anticipate meeting Us, and are content with the worldly life, and feel secure in it, and those who pay no attention to Our signs.
These: their dwelling is the Fire, on account of what they used to do.
As for those who believe and do good deeds, their Lord guides them in their faith. Rivers will flow beneath them in the Gardens of Bliss.
Their call in it is, “Glory be to You, our God.” And their greeting in it is, “Peace.” And the last of their call is, “Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Universe!”
Were Allah to speed up the ill for people, as they wish to speed up the good, their term would be fulfilled. But We leave those who do not anticipate Our meeting to blunder in their rebellion.
When adversity touches the human being, he prays to Us—reclining on his side, or sitting, or standing. But when We have relieved his adversity from him, he goes away, as though he had not called on Us for trouble that had afflicted him. Thus the deeds of the transgressors appear good to them.
We have destroyed generations before you when they did wrong. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they would not believe. Thus We recompense the guilty people.
Then We made you successors on earth after them, to see how you would behave.
And when Our clear revelations are conveyed to them, those who do not anticipate the meeting with Us, say, “Bring a Quran other than this, or change it.” Say, “It is not for me to change it of my own accord. I only follow what is revealed to me. I fear, should I disobey my Lord, the suffering of an awesome Day.”
Say, “Had Allah willed, I would not have read it to you, nor would He have made it known to you. I have lived among you for a lifetime before it. Do you not understand?”
Who does more wrong than someone who fabricates lies about Allah, or denies His revelations? The guilty will never succeed.
And they worship, besides Allah, what neither harms them nor benefits them. And they say, “These are our intercessors with Allah.” Say, “Are you informing Allah about something He does not know in the heavens or on earth?” Glorified be He, High above the associations they make.
Humanity was a single community, but then they differed. Were it not for a prior decree from your Lord, the matters over which they had disputed would have been settled.
And they say, “If only a miracle was sent down to him from his Lord.” Say, “The realm of the unseen belongs to Allah. So wait, I am waiting with you.”
When We make people taste mercy after some adversity has touched them, they begin to scheme against Our signs. Say, “Allah is swifter in scheming.” Our envoys are recording what you scheme.
It is He who transports you across land and sea. Until, when you are on ships sailing in a favorable wind, and rejoicing in it, a raging wind appears. The waves surge over them from every side, and they realize that they are besieged. Thereupon they pray to Allah, declaring sincere devotion to Him: “If You save us from this, we will be of the thankful.”
But then, when He has saved them, they commit violations on earth, and they oppose justice. O, people! Your violations are against your own souls. It is the enjoyment of the present life. Then to Us is your return, and We will inform you of what you used to do.
The parable of the present life is that of water that We send down from the sky is absorbed by the plants of the earth, from which people and animals eat. Until, when the earth puts on its fine appearance, and it is beautified, and its inhabitants think they have gained mastery over it, Our command descends on it by night or by day, and We turn it into a mown field—as if it had not flourished the day before. Thus We clarify the communications for a people who reflect.
Allah invites to the Home of Peace, and He guides whomever He wills on a straight path.
For those who do good is goodness—and more. Neither gloom nor shame will cover their faces. These are the inhabitants of Paradise, abiding in it forever.
As for those who commit evil: a reward of similar evil; and shame will overcome them. They will have no defender against Allah—as if their faces are covered with dark patches of night. These are the inmates of the Fire, abiding in it forever.
On the Day when We gather them all together, then We say to those who ascribed partners, “To your place, you and your partners.” Then We will separate between them, and their partners will say, “It was not us you were worshiping.”
“Allah is a sufficient witness between us and you. We were unaware of your worship.”
There and then, every soul will experience what it had done previously. And they will be returned to Allah, their True Master. And what they used to invent will abandon them.
Say, “Who provides for you from heaven and earth? And who regulates the hearing and the sight? And who produces the living from the dead, and produces the dead from the living? And who governs the Order?” They will say, “Allah.” Say, “Will you not be cautious?”
That is Allah, your true Lord. What is there, beyond truth, except error? How are you turned away?
Thus the Word of your Lord proved true against those who disobeyed, for they do not believe.
Say, “Can any of your partners initiate creation, and then repeat it?” Say, “Allah initiates the creation, then He repeats it. How can you be so deluded?”
Say, “Can any of your partners guide to the truth?” Say, “Allah guides to the truth. Is He who guides to the truth more deserving of being followed, or he who does not guide, unless he himself is guided? What is the matter with you? How do you judge?”
Most of them follow nothing but speculations, and speculations can in no way replace the truth. Allah is fully aware of what they do.
This Quran could not have been produced by anyone other than Allah. In fact, it is a confirmation of what preceded it, and an elaboration of the Book. There is no doubt about it—it is from the Lord of the Universe.
Or do they say, “He made it up?” Say, “Then produce a single chapter like it, and call upon whomever you can, apart from Allah, if you are truthful.”
In fact, they deny what is beyond the limits of their knowledge, and whose explanation has not reached them. Thus those before them refused to believe. So note the consequence for the wrongdoers.
And among them are those who believe in it, and among them are those who do not believe in it. Your Lord fully knows the mischief-makers.
And if they accuse you of lying, say, “I have my deeds, and you have your deeds. You are innocent of what I do, and I am innocent of what you do.”
And among them are those who listen to you. But can you make the deaf hear, even though they do not understand?
And among them are those who look at you. But can you guide the blind, even though they do not see?
Allah does not wrong people in the least, but people wrong their own selves.
On the Day when He gathers them—as if they had stayed for only an hour of a day—acquainting themselves with one another. Lost are those who denied the meeting with Allah, and were not guided.
Whether We show you some of what We promised them, or We retrieve you—to Us is their return. Allah is witness over everything they do.
For every community is a messenger. When their messenger has come, judgment will be passed between them with justice, and they will not be wronged.
And they say, “When will this promise be fulfilled—if you are truthful?”
Say, “I have no power to harm or benefit myself, except as Allah wills. For every nation is an appointed time. Then, when their time has arrived, they cannot delay it by one hour, nor can they advance it.
Say, “Have you considered? If His punishment overtakes you by night or by day, what part of it will the guilty seek to rush?”
“Then, when it befalls, will you believe in it? Now? When you tried to rush it?”
Then it will be said to those who did wrong, “Taste the torment of eternity. Are you not repaid except for what you used to commit?”
And they inquire of you, “Is it true?” Say, “Yes, by my Lord, it is true, and you cannot prevent it.”
If each soul that has done injustice possessed all that the earth contains, it would offer it as ransom. They will hide the remorse when they see the suffering, and it will be judged between them equitably, and they will not be wronged.
Certainly, to Allah belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. Certainly, the promise of Allah is true. But most of them do not know.
He gives life, and He causes death. And to Him, you will be returned.
O, people! There has come to you advice from your Lord, and healing for what is in the hearts, and guidance and mercy for believers.
Say, “In Allah’s grace and mercy let them rejoice. That is better than whatever they accumulate.”
Say, “Have you considered the sustenance that Allah sent down for you, some of which you made unlawful, and some lawful?” Say, “Did Allah give you permission, or are you fabricating lies and attributing them to Allah?”
What will those who fabricate lies against Allah think on the Day of Resurrection? Allah is bountiful towards people, but most of them are not thankful.
You do not get into any situation, nor do you recite any Quran, nor do you do anything, but We are watching over you as you undertake it. Not even an atom’s weight, on earth or in the sky, evades your Lord, nor is there anything smaller or larger, but is in a clear record.
Unquestionably, Allah’s friends have nothing to fear, nor will they grieve.
Those who believe and protect themselves.
For them is good news in this life, and in the Hereafter. There is no alteration to the words of Allah. That is the supreme triumph.
And let not their speech dishearten you. All power is Allah’s. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Certainly, to Allah belongs everyone in the heavens and everyone on earth. Those who invoke other than Allah do not follow partners; they follow nothing but assumptions, and they only guess.
It is He who made the night for your rest, and the daylight for visibility. Surely in this are signs for people who listen.
They said, “Allah has taken a child.” Be He glorified. He is the Self-Sufficient. His is everything in the heavens and everything on earth. Do you have any proof of this? Or are you saying about Allah what you do not know?
Say, “Those who fabricate lies about Allah will not succeed.”
Some enjoyment in this life, then to Us is their return, then We will make them taste the severe suffering on account of their disbelief.
And relate to them the story of Noah, when he said to his people, “O my people, if my presence among you and my reminding you of Allah’s messages is too much for you, then in Allah I have put my trust. So come to a decision, you and your partners, and let not the matter perplex you, then carry out your decision against me, and do not hold back.”
“But if you turn away, I did not ask you for any wage. My wage falls only on Allah, and I was commanded to be of the Submitters.”
But they denounced him, so We saved him and those with him in the Ark, and We made them successors, and We drowned those who rejected Our signs. So consider the fate of the forewarned.
Then, after him, We sent messengers to their people. They came to them with clear proofs, but they would not believe in anything they had already rejected. Thus We seal the hearts of the hostile.
Then, after them, We sent Moses and Aaron with Our proofs to Pharaoh and his dignitaries. But they acted arrogantly. They were sinful people.
And when the truth came to them from Us, they said, “This is nothing but plain magic.”
Moses said, “Is this what you say about the truth when it has come to you? Is this magic? Magicians do not succeed.”
They said, “Did you come to us to divert us from what we found our ancestors following, and so that you become prominent in the land? We will never believe in you.”
Pharaoh said, “Bring me every experienced magician!”
And when the magicians came, Moses said to them, “Throw whatever you have to throw!”
And when they threw, Moses said, “What you produced is magic, and Allah will make it fail. Allah does not foster the efforts of the corruptors.”
“But Allah affirms the truth with His words, even though the guilty hate it.”
But none believed in Moses except some youths of his people, for fear that Pharaoh and his chiefs would persecute them. Pharaoh was high and mighty in the land. He was a tyrant.
Moses said, “O my people! If you have believed in Allah, then trust in Him, if you are submitters.”
They said, “In Allah we trust. Our Lord, do not make us a temptation for the wrongdoing people.”
“And deliver us, by Your mercy, from the unbelieving people.”
And We inspired Moses and his brother: “Appoint for your people houses in Egypt, and make your homes places of worship, and perform the prayer, and give good news to the believers.”
Moses said, “Our Lord, you have given Pharaoh and his notables luxuries and riches in the worldly life. Our Lord, for them to lead away from Your path. Our Lord, obliterate their wealth, and harden their hearts—they will not believe until they see the painful punishment.”
He said, “Your prayer is answered. So go straight, and do not follow the path of those who do not know.”
And We delivered the Children of Israel across the sea. Pharaoh and his troops pursued them defiantly and aggressively. Until, when he was about to drown, he said, “I believe that there is no god except the One in whom the Children of Israel believe, and I am of those who submit.”
Now? When you have rebelled before, and were of the mischief-makers?
Today, We will preserve you in your body, so that you become an example for those after you. But most people are negligent of Our examples.
And We settled the Children of Israel in a position of honor, and We provided them with good things. They did not differ until knowledge came to them. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their differences.
If you are in doubt about what We revealed to you, ask those who read the Scripture before you. The truth has come to you from your Lord, so do not be of those who doubt.
And do not be of those who deny Allah’s messages, lest you become of the losers.
Those against whom your Lord’s Word is justified will not believe.
Even if every sign were to come to them—until they see the agonizing suffering.
If only there was one town that believed and benefited by its belief. Except for the people of Jonah. When they believed, We lifted from them the suffering of disgrace in this worldly life, and We gave them enjoyment for a while.
Had your Lord willed, everyone on earth would have believed, all together. Would you compel people to become believers?
No soul can believe except by Allah’s permission. And He lays disgrace on those who do not reason.
Say, “Consider all that is in the heavens and on earth.” But neither signs nor warnings avail a people who do not believe.
Are they waiting for anything but the likes of the days of those who passed away before them? Say, “So wait—I am waiting with you.”
Then We save Our messengers and those who believe. It is binding on Us to save the believers.
Say, “O people! If you are in doubt about my religion—I do not worship those you worship below Allah. But I worship Allah, who will terminate your lives. And I was commanded to be of the believers.”
And dedicate yourself to the true religion—a monotheist—and never be of the associators.
And do not call, besides Allah, on what neither benefits you nor harms you. If you do, you will be of the wrongdoers.
If Allah touches you with harm, none can remove it except He. And if He intends good for you, none can hold back His grace. He makes it fall on whomever He wills of His servants. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
Say, “O people! The truth has come to you from your Lord. Whoever is guided, is guided for himself. And whoever strays, strays only against himself. And I am not a guardian over you.”
And follow what is revealed to you, and be patient until Allah issues His judgment. And He is the Best of judges.
Alif. Lam. Ra. A Scripture whose Verses were perfected, then explained. From the presence of One Wise and Aware.
That you shall worship none but Allah. “I am a warner to you from Him, and a deliverer of good news.”
“And seek forgiveness from your Lord, and turn to Him in repentance. He will grant you a good provision for a stated term, and He will bestow His grace on every possessor of virtue. But if you turn away: then I fear for you the punishment of a formidable Day.”
“To Allah is your return, and He is capable of everything.”
They wrap their chests to hide from Him. But even as they cover themselves with their clothes, He knows what they hide and what they disclose. He knows what is within the hearts.
There is no moving creature on earth, but its sustenance depends on Allah. And He knows where it lives and where it rests. Everything is in a Clear Book.
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six Days—and His Throne was upon the waters—in order to test you; as which of you is best in conduct. And if you were to say, “You will be resurrected after death,” those who disbelieve will say, “This is nothing but obvious witchcraft.”
And if We postpone their punishment until a stated time, they will say, “What holds it back?” On the Day when it overtakes them, it will not be averted from them, and what they ridiculed will besiege them.
If We give the human being a taste of mercy from Us, then We withdraw it from him, he becomes hopeless and ungrateful.
And if We give him a taste of prosperity, after some adversity had touched him, he will say, “My troubles are gone from me.” He becomes happy and proud.
Except those who endure patiently and do good deeds—these will have forgiveness and an immense reward.
Perhaps you wish to disregard some of what is revealed to you. And it stresses you, because they say, “If only a treasure was sent down to him, or an angel came with him.” You are only a warner, and Allah is Responsible for everything.
Or do they say, “He made it up?” Say, “Then produce ten chapters like it, made up, and call upon whomever you can, apart from Allah, if you are truthful.”
But if they do not answer you, then know that it was revealed with Allah's knowledge, and that there is no god except He. Will you then submit?
Whoever desires the life of this world and its glitter—We will fully recompense them for their deeds therein, and therein they will not be defrauded.
These—they will have nothing in the Hereafter except the Fire. Their efforts are in vain therein, and their works are null.
Is someone who possesses clear proof from his Lord, backed by testimony from Him, and preceded by the Book of Moses, a guide and a mercy? These believe in it. But whoever defies it from among the factions: the Fire is his promise. So have no doubt about it. It is the truth from your Lord, but most people do not believe.
And who does more wrong than someone who fabricates lies against Allah? These will be presented before their Lord, and the witnesses will say, “These are the ones who lied about their Lord.” Surely, Allah’s condemnation is upon the wrongdoers.
Those who hinder others from Allah’s path, and seek to make it crooked—and regarding the Hereafter, they are in denial.
These will not escape on earth, and they have no protectors besides Allah. The punishment will be multiplied for them. They have failed to hear, and they have failed to see.
It is they who have lost their souls, and whatever they fabricated has failed them.
Without a doubt, in the Hereafter, they will be the worst losers.
As for those who believe and do good deeds, and humble themselves before their Lord—these are the residents of Paradise, where they will remain forever.
The parable of the two groups is that of the blind and the deaf, and the seeing and the hearing. Are they equal in comparison? Will you not reflect?
We sent Noah to his people, “I am to you a clear warner.”
“That you shall worship none but Allah. I fear for you the agony of a painful Day.”
The notables among his people who disbelieved said, “We see in you nothing but a human like us, and we see that only the lowliest among us have followed you, those of immature judgment. And we see that you have no advantage over us. In fact, we think you are liars.”
He said, “O my people! Consider if I stand on clear evidence from my Lord, and He has blessed me with mercy from Himself, but you are blind to it. Can we force you to accept it, even though you are unwilling?”
“O, my people! I ask of you no money for it. My wage is only from Allah. And I am not about to dismiss those who have believed—they will surely meet their Lord. And I see that you are ignorant people.”
“O, my people! Who would protect me from Allah, if I were to dismiss them? Will you not give a thought?”
“And I do not say to you that I possess the treasuries of Allah; nor do I know the future; nor do I claim to be an angel; nor do I say that Allah will not grant goodness to those you look down upon. Allah knows best what is within them. If I did, I would be of the wrongdoers.”
They said, “O Noah, you have argued with us, and argued much. Now bring upon us what you threaten us with—if you are truthful.”
He said, “It is Allah who will bring it upon you—if He wills—and you will not escape it.”
“My advice will not benefit you—much as I desire to advise you—if Allah intends to confound you. He is your Lord; and to Him, you will be returned.”
Or do they say, “He made it up?” Say, “If I made it up, then my crime falls upon me. And I am innocent of the crimes you commit.”
And it was revealed to Noah: “None of your people will believe, except those who have already believed. So do not be distressed by what they do.”
“And build the Ark, before Our eyes, and with Our inspiration. And do not address Me regarding those who did wrong—they will be drowned.”
And he was building the Ark, and whenever notables among his people passed by him, they would ridicule him. He said, “If you ridicule us, we ridicule you, just as you ridicule.”
“You will know upon whom will come a humiliating punishment, and upon whom will fall lasting suffering.”
And when Our command came, and the volcano erupted, We said, “Board into it a pair of every kind, and your family—except those against whom the sentence has already passed—and those who believe.” But none believed with him except a few.
And he said, “Embark in it. In the name of Allah be its sailing and its anchorage. My Lord is Forgiving and Merciful.”
And so it sailed with them amidst waves like hills. And Noah called out to his son, who stood apart, “O my son! Embark with us, and be not with the unbelievers.”
He said, “I will take shelter on a mountain—it will protect me from the waters.” He said, “There is no protection from Allah’s command today, except for him on whom He has mercy.” And the waves surged between them, and he was of the drowned.
And it was said, “O earth, swallow your waters,” and “O sky, clear up.” And the waters receded, and the event was concluded, and it settled on Judi, and it was said, “Away with the wrongdoing people.”
And Noah called out to his Lord, and said, “O My Lord, my son is of my family, and Your promise is true, and You are the Wisest of judges.”
He said, “O Noah, he is not of your family—he was of unrighteous conduct. So do not ask Me about what you have no knowledge of. I advise you, lest you be of the ignorant.”
He said, “O My Lord, I seek refuge in You, from asking You about what I have no knowledge of. Unless You forgive me and have mercy on me, I will be of the losers.”
It was said, “O Noah, disembark with peace from Us; and with blessings upon you, and upon communities from those with you. And other communities We will grant prosperity, and then a painful torment from Us will befall them.”
These are accounts from the past that we reveal to you. Neither you nor your people knew them before this. So be patient. The future belongs to the pious.
And to Aad, their brother Hud. He said, “O my people! Worship Allah! You have no god other than Him. You are nothing but fabricators.”
“O my people, I ask of you no wage for it. My wage rests with Him who originated me. Do you not understand?”
“O my people, seek forgiveness from your Lord, and repent to Him: He will release the sky pouring down upon you, and will add strength to your strength. And do not turn away, guilty.”
They said, “O Hud, you did not bring us any evidence, and we are not about to abandon our gods on your word, and we are not believers in you.”
“We only say that some of our gods have possessed you with evil.” He said, “I call Allah to witness, and you to witness, that I am innocent of what you associate.
Besides Him. So scheme against me, all of you, and do not hesitate.
I have placed my trust in Allah—my Lord, and your Lord. There is not a living creature, but He holds it by its forelock. My Lord is on a straight path.
But if you turn away, I have conveyed to you what I was sent to you with. And my Lord will replace you with another people. And you are not harming Him in the least. My Lord is Guardian over everything.”
And when Our command came, We saved Hud and those who believed with him, by mercy from Us. And We saved them from severe suffering.
That was Aad; they denied their Lord’s messages, and defied His messengers, and followed the command of every stubborn tyrant.
And they were pursued by a curse in this world—and on the Day of Resurrection. Surely Aad denied their Lord. So away with Aad, the people of Hud.
And to Thamood, their brother Saleh. He said, “O my people! Worship Allah! You have no god other than Him. He initiated you from the earth, and He settled you on it. So seek forgiveness from Him, and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is Near and Responsive.”
They said, “O Saleh, we had high hopes in you before this. Are you trying to prevent us from worshiping what our forefathers worshiped? We are in serious doubt about what you are calling us to.”
He said, “O, my people! Consider if I stand on clear evidence from my Lord, and He has blessed me with mercy from Himself, who would protect me from Allah if I were to disobey Him? You add nothing for me except loss.”
“O, my people! This is Allah’s female camel, a sign for you. So leave her to graze on Allah’s land, and do her no harm, lest an imminent punishment overtakes you.”
But they hamstrung her. Then he said, “Enjoy yourselves in your homes for three days. This is a prophecy that is infallible.”
And when Our command arrived, We saved Saleh and those who believed with him, by mercy from Us, and from the disgrace of that Day. Your Lord is the Strong, the Powerful.
And the Scream overtook those who did wrong, and they became motionless bodies in their homes.
As if they had never prospered there. Thamood denied their Lord, so away with Thamood.
And Our envoys came to Abraham with good news. They said, “Peace.” He said, “Peace.” Soon after, he came with a roasted calf.
But when he saw their hands not reaching towards it, he became suspicious of them, and conceived fear of them. They said, “Do not fear, we are sent to the people of Lot.”
And his wife was standing by, so she laughed. Then We gave her good news of Isaac; and after Isaac, Jacob.
She said, “Alas for me. Would I give birth, when I am an old woman, and this husband of mine is an old man? This is something strange.”
They said, “Do you marvel at Allah’s command? Allah’s mercy and His Blessings be upon you, O People of the Household! He is Praiseworthy and Glorious.”
So when Abraham's fear subsided, and the good news had reached him, he began pleading with Us concerning Lot’s people.
Abraham was gentle, kind, devout.
“O Abraham, refrain from this. The command of your Lord has come—they have incurred irreversible punishment.”
And when Our envoys came to Lot, he was distressed on their account, and he felt powerless concerning them, and he said, “This is a terrible day.”
And his people came rushing towards him—they were in the habit of committing sins. He said, “O my people, these are my daughters; they are purer for you. So fear Allah, and do not embarrass me before my guests. Is there not among you one reasonable man?”
They said, “You certainly know that we have no right to your daughters. You already know what we want.”
He said, “If only I had the strength, or could rely on some strong support.”
They said, “O Lot, we are the envoys of your Lord. They will never reach you. So set out with your family during the cover of the night, and let none of you look back, except for your wife. She will be struck by what will strike them. Their appointed time is the morning. Is the morning not near?”
And when Our command came, We turned it upside down, and We rained on it stones of baked clay.
Marked from your Lord, and not far from the wrongdoers.
And to Median, their brother Shuaib. He said, “O my people! Worship Allah! You have no god other than Him. Do not diminish the measure and the balance. I see you in good circumstances, but I fear for you the agony of an overwhelming Day.”
“O, my people! Give full measure and weigh with justice, and do not diminish people’s goods, and do not spread corruption in the land.
The remnant from Allah is better for you—if you are believers. And I am not a keeper over you.”
They said, “O Shuaib, does your manner of praying require that we forsake what our fathers worshipped, or that we give up managing our wealth as we please? You are the one who is tolerant and wise.”
He said, “O my people! Consider: if I stand upon clear evidence from my Lord, and He has blessed me with a good provision from Him. I have no desire to do what I forbid you from doing. I only intend reform to the best of my ability. My success lies with Allah. In Him I trust; and to Him, I turn.”
“O, my people! Do not let your opposition to me cause you to suffer what was suffered by the people of Noah, or the people of Hud, or the people of Saleh. And the people of Lot are not far from you.”
“And ask your Lord for forgiveness, and turn to Him in repentance. My Lord is Most-Merciful, Most-Loving.”
They said, “O Shuaib, we do not understand much of what you say, and we see you powerless among us. And were it not for your clan, we would have stoned you. You are of no value to us.”
He said, “O my people! Is my clan more important to you than Allah? And you turned your backs on Him. My Lord comprehends everything you do.”
“O, my people! Do as you may, and so will I. You will know who will be visited by a punishment that will shame him, and who is a liar. So look out; I am on the lookout with you.”
And when Our command arrived, We saved Shuaib and those who believed with him, through mercy from Us, and the Blast struck those who did wrong, so they fell lifeless in their homes.
As if they had never flourished there. So away with Median, as was done away with Thamood.
And We sent Moses with Our messages and a clear mandate.
To Pharaoh and his nobles, but they followed the command of Pharaoh, and Pharaoh’s command was not sound.
He will precede his people on the Day of Resurrection, and he will lead them into the Fire. Evil is the destination to which they are led.
And they were pursued by a curse in this—and on the Day of Resurrection. Miserable is the path they followed.
These are some of the reports of the towns, which We relate to you. Some are still standing, and some were mowed down.
We did not wrong them, but they wronged themselves. Their gods, whom they invoked besides Allah, availed them nothing when your Lord’s command arrived. In fact, they added only to their ruin.
Such is the grip of your Lord when He seizes the towns while they are doing wrong. His grip is most painful, most severe.
Surely in this is a sign for whoever fears the suffering of the Hereafter. That is a Day for which humanity will be gathered together. That is a Day to be witnessed.
We only postpone it until a predetermined time.
When that Day arrives, no soul will speak except with His permission. Some of them will be miserable, and some will be happy.
As for those who are miserable, they will be in the Fire. They will have there sighing and wailing.
Abiding there, for as long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord wills. Your Lord is Doer of whatever He wills.
And as for those who are happy, they will be in Paradise, abiding there, for as long as the heavens and the earth endure, except as your Lord wills—a reward without interruption.
Therefore, be not in doubt concerning what these worship. They worship only as their ancestors worshiped before. We will give them their due in full, with no reduction.
We gave Moses the Scripture, but differences arose regarding it. Were it not for a prior word from your Lord, their differences would have been settled. But they are in serious doubt about it.
Your Lord will fully pay all for their deeds. He is Aware of everything they do.
So be upright, as you are commanded, along with those who repented with you. And do not transgress. He is Seeing of everything you do.
And do not incline towards those who do wrong, lest the Fire touches you, and you will have no protectors besides Allah, and you will not be helped.
Perform the prayer at the borders of the day, and during the approaches of the night. The good deeds take away the bad deeds. This is a reminder for the mindful.
And be patient. Allah will not waste the reward of the virtuous.
If only there were, among the generations before you, people with wisdom, who spoke against corruption on earth—except for the few whom We saved among them. But the wrongdoers pursued the luxuries they were indulged in, and they became wicked.
Your Lord would never destroy the towns unjustly, while their inhabitants are reforming.
Had your Lord willed, He would have made humanity one community, but they will always differ.
Except those upon whom your Lord has mercy—and for that reason He created them. And the Word of your Lord is final: “I will fill Hell with jinn and humans, all together.”
We relate to you the stories of the messengers to reassure your heart. There has come to you in this the truth, and a lesson, and a reminder for the believers.
And say to those who do not believe, “Act according to your ability; and so will we.”
“And wait! We too are waiting.”
To Allah belongs the unseen of the heavens and the earth. And to Him, all authority goes back. So worship Him, and rely on Him. Your Lord is never unaware of what you do.
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the Verses of the Clarifying Book.
We have revealed it an Arabic Quran, so that you may understand.
We relate to you the most accurate history, by revealing to you this Quran. Although, prior to it, you were of the unaware.
When Joseph said to his father, “O my father, I saw eleven planets, and the sun, and the moon. I saw them prostrating to me.”
He said, “O my son, do not relate your vision to your brothers, lest they plot and scheme against you. Satan is man's sworn enemy.
And so your Lord will choose you, and will teach you the interpretation of events, and will complete His favor upon you and upon the House of Jacob, just as He completed it before upon your forefathers Abraham and Isaac. Your Lord is Knowing and Wise.
In Joseph and his brothers are lessons for the seekers.
When they said, “Joseph and his brother are dearer to our father than we are, although we are a bunch. Our father is clearly in the wrong.”
“Kill Joseph, or throw him somewhere in the land, and your father‘s attention will be all yours. Afterward, you will be decent people.”
One of them said, “Do not kill Joseph, but throw him into the bottom of the well; some caravan may pick him up—if you must do something.”
They said, “Father, why don't you trust us with Joseph, although we care for him?”
“Let him go with us tomorrow, to enjoy himself and play; we will take good care of him.”
He said, “It worries me that you would take him away. And I fear that the wolf may eat him, while you are careless of him.”
They said, “If the wolf were to eat him, and we are so many, we would be worthless.”
So they went away with him, and they agreed to put him in the well's bottom. And We inspired him, “You will inform them of this deed of theirs when they are unaware.”
And they returned to their father in the evening, weeping.
They said, “O father, we went racing with one another, and we left Joseph by our belongings, and the wolf ate him. But you will not believe us, even if we were truthful.”
And they brought his shirt, with fake blood on it. He said, “Your souls enticed you to something. Beautiful Patience! And Allah is the One Whose help is sought against what you claim.”
And a caravan passed by, and they sent their water-carrier. He lowered his bucket, and said, “Good news. There is a boy.” And they hid him as merchandise. But Allah knew what they did.
And they sold him for a low price—a few coins—they considered him to be of little value.
The man from Egypt who bought him said to his wife, “Take good care of him; he may be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son.” We thus established Joseph in the land, to teach him the interpretation of events. Allah prevails over His affairs, but most people do not know.
And when he reached his maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus We reward the righteous.
She in whose house he was living tried to seduce him. She shut the doors, and said, “Come to me!” He said, “Allah is my refuge! He is my Lord. He has given me a good home. Sinners never succeed.”
She desired him, and he desired her, had he not seen the evidence of his Lord. It was thus that We diverted evil and indecency from him. He is one of Our chosen servants.
And they raced towards the door, and she tore his shirt from behind. At the door, they ran into her master. She said, “What is the punishment for anyone who tried to violate your wife, except imprisonment or a painful punishment?”
He said, “It was she who tried to seduce me.” And a witness from her household suggested: “If his shirt is torn from the front: then she has told the truth, and he is the liar.
But if his shirt is torn from behind: then she has lied, and he is the truthful.”
And when he saw that his shirt is torn from behind, he said, “This is among the schemes of you women—your scheming is serious indeed.”
“Joseph! Turn away from this. And you, woman, ask forgiveness for your sin; you are indeed in the wrong.”
Some women in the city said, “The governor's wife is trying to seduce her servant. She is deeply in love with him. We see that she is clearly lost.”
And when she heard of their gossip, she invited them, and prepared a banquet for them, and gave each of them a knife. And she said, “Come out before them.” And when they saw him, they marveled at him, and they cut their hands, and said, “Good God, this is not a human, this must be a precious angel.”
She said, “Here is the one you blamed me for. I did try to seduce him, but he resisted. And if he does not do what I command him, he will be imprisoned, and he will be one of the despised.”
He said, “My Lord, prison is more desirable to me than what they call me to. Unless You turn their scheming away from me, I may yield to them, and become one of the ignorant.”
So his Lord answered him, and turned their cunning away from him. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Then it occurred to them—after they had seen the proofs—to imprison him for a time.
Two young men entered the prison with him. One of them said, “I see myself pressing wine.” The other said, “I see myself carrying bread on my head, from which the birds eat. Inform us of its interpretation—we see that you are one of the righteous.”
He said, “No food is served to you, but I informed you about it before you received it. This is some of what my Lord has taught me. I have forsaken the tradition of people who do not believe in Allah; and regarding the Hereafter, they are deniers.”
“And I have followed the faith of my forefathers: Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob. It is not for us to ascribe any partners to Allah. This is by virtue of Allah’s grace upon us and upon the people, but most people do not give thanks.”
“O my fellow inmates: are diverse lords better, or Allah, the One, the Supreme?”
“You worship apart from him nothing but names, that you have named—you and your ancestors—a practice Allah never authorized. Judgment rests with none but Allah. He has commanded that you worship none but Him. This is the upright religion, but most people do not know.
“O, my fellow inmates! One of you will serve his master wine. As for the other, he will be crucified, and birds will eat from his head. Thus the matter you are inquiring about is settled.”
And he said to the one he knew would be released, “Mention me to your master.” But Satan caused him to forget to make mention to his master, so he remained in prison for several years.
And the king said, “I see seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and seven green spikes and others dried up. O elders: explain my vision to me, if you can interpret visions.”
They said, “Jumbles of dreams, and we know nothing of the interpretation of dreams.”
The one who was released said, having remembered after a time, “I will inform you of its interpretation, so send me out.”
“Joseph, O man of truth! Inform us about seven fat cows being eaten by seven lean ones, and seven green spikes and others dried up, so that I may return to the people, so that they may know.”
He said, “You will cultivate diligently for seven years. But whatever you harvest, leave it in its spikes, except for the little that you eat.”
Then after that will come seven difficult ones, which will consume what you have stored for them, except for the little that you have stored.
Then after that will come a year that brings relief to the people, and during which they will press.
The king said, “Bring him to me!” And when the envoy came to him, he said, “Go back to your master, and ask him about the intentions of the women who cut their hands—my Lord is well aware of their schemes.”
He said, “What was the matter with you—women—when you tried to seduce Joseph?” They said, “Allah forbid! We know nothing indecent about him.” Then the governor’s wife said, “Now the truth is out. It was I who tried to seduce him, and he is telling the truth.”
“This is so, that he may know that I did not betray him in his absence—and that Allah does not guide the scheming of the betrayers.”
“And I do not claim to be innocent. The soul commands to evil, except those on whom my Lord has mercy. My Lord is Forgiving and Merciful.”
And the king said, “Bring him to me, and I will keep him for myself.” Then, when he spoke to him, he said, “As of today, you are with us established and secure.”
He said, “Put me in charge of the storehouses of the land; I am honest and knowledgeable.”
And thus We established Joseph in the land, so that he may settle wherever he pleased. We touch with Our mercy whomever We will, and We never waste the reward of the good-doers.
But the reward of the Hereafter is better for those who believe and observe piety.
And Joseph's brothers came, and they entered his presence. He recognized them, but they did not recognize him.
And when he provided them with their supplies, he said, “Bring me a brother of yours from your father. Do you not see that I give full measure, and I am the best of hosts?”
“But if you do not bring him to me, you will receive no measure from me, nor will you come near me.”
They said, “We will solicit him from his father. We will surely do.”
And he said to his servants, “Put their goods in their saddlebags; perhaps they will recognize them when they return to their families, and perhaps they will come back.”
When they returned to their father, they said, “O father, we were denied measure, but send our brother with us, and we will obtain measure. We will take good care of him.”
He said, “Shall I trust you with him, as I trusted you with his brother before? Allah is the Best Protector, and He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
And when they opened their baggage, they found their goods returned to them. They said, “Father, what more can we ask for? Here is our merchandise, fully returned to us. Now we can provide for our family, and protect our brother, and obtain an additional camel-load. That load can be easily secured.”
He said, “I will not send him with you, unless you give me a pledge before Allah, that you will bring him back to me—unless you get trapped.” And when they gave him their pledge, he said, “Allah is Guardian over everything we say.”
And he said, “O my sons, do not enter through one gate, but enter through different gates. I cannot avail you anything against Allah. The decision rests only with Allah. Upon Him, I rely. And upon Him, let the reliant rely upon.”
And when they entered as their father had instructed them, it did not avail them anything against Allah, but it fulfilled a need in Jacob’s soul. He was a person of knowledge inasmuch as We taught him, but most people do not know.
And when they entered the presence of Joseph, he drew his brother close to him, and said, “I am your brother; so do not be distressed by what they used to do.”
Then, when he provided them with their supplies, he placed the drinking-cup in his brother’s saddlebag. Then a caller announced, “O people of the caravan, you are thieves.”
They said, as they came towards them, “What are you missing?”
They said, “We are missing the king’s cup. Whoever produces it will receive a camel-load, and I personally guarantee it.”
They said, “By Allah, you know that we didn’t come to cause trouble in the land, and we are not thieves.”
They said, “What shall be his punishment—if you are lying?”
They said, “His punishment—if it is found in his bag—he will belong to you. Thus we penalize the guilty.”
So he began with their bags, before his brother's bag. Then he pulled it from his brother’s bag. Thus We devised a plan for Joseph. He could not have detained his brother under the king’s law—unless Allah so willed. We elevate in rank whomever We will; and above every possessor of knowledge, there is a Knower.
They said, “If he has stolen, a brother of his has stolen before.” But Joseph kept it to himself, and did not disclose it to them. He said, “You are in a bad situation, and Allah is Aware of what you claim.”
They said, “O noble prince, he has a father, a very old man, so take one of us in his place. We see that you are of the good-doers.”
He said, “Allah forbid, that we should detain anyone except whom we found our property with him. For then, we would be unjust.”
And when they despaired of him, they had a private conversation. Their eldest said, “Don’t you know that your father received a pledge from you before Allah; and in the past, you neglected Joseph? I will not leave this land until my father permits me, or Allah decides for me; for He is the Best of deciders.”
“Go back to your father, and say, ‘Father, your son has committed theft. And we testify only to what we know, and we could not guard against the unforeseen.’”
“And ask the town where we were, and the caravan in which we came. We are being truthful.”
He said, “No! Your souls tempted you into something. Patience is a virtue. Perhaps Allah will bring them all back to me. He is the Knowing, the Wise.”
Then he turned away from them, and said, “O my bitterness for Joseph.” And his eyes turned white with grief, and he became depressed.
They said, “By Allah, you will not stop remembering Joseph, until you have ruined your health, or you have passed away.”
He said, “I complain of my sorrow and grief to Allah alone, and I know from Allah what you do not know.”
“O my sons, go inquire about Joseph and his brother, and do not despair of Allah's comfort. None despairs of Allah's comfort except the disbelieving people.”
Then, when they entered his presence, they said, “Mighty governor, adversity has afflicted us and our family. And we have brought scant merchandise. But give us full measure and be charitable towards us—Allah rewards the charitable.”
He said, “Do you realize what you did with Joseph and his brother, in your ignorance?”
They said, “Is that you, Joseph?” He said, “I am Joseph, and this is my brother. Allah has been gracious to us. He who protects himself and perseveres—Allah never fails the reward of the virtuous.”
They said, “By Allah! Allah has preferred you over us, and we were at fault.”
He said, “There is no blame on you today. Allah will forgive you. He is the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
“Go with this shirt of mine, and lay it over my father’s face, and he will recover his sight. And bring your whole family to me.”
As the caravan set out, their father said, “I sense the presence of Joseph, although you may think I am senile.”
They said, “By Allah, you are still in your old confusion.”
Then, when the bearer of good news arrived, he laid it over his face, and he regained his sight. He said, “Did I not tell you that I know from Allah what you do not know?”
They said, “Father, pray for the forgiveness of our sins; we were at fault.”
He said, “I will ask my Lord to forgive you. He is the Forgiving, the Most Merciful.”
Then, when they entered the presence of Joseph, he drew his parents close to him, and said, “Enter Egypt, Allah willing, safe and secure.”
And he elevated his parents on the throne, and they fell down before him, bowing. He said, “Father, this is the fulfillment of my vision of long ago. My Lord has made it come true. He was good to me when he released me from prison, and brought you out of the wilderness—after Satan sowed conflict between me and my brothers. My Lord is Most Kind towards whom He wills. He is the All-Knowing, the All-Wise.”
“My Lord, You have given me some authority, and You taught me some interpretation of events. The Originator of the heavens and the earth. You are my Protector in this life and the Hereafter. Receive my soul in submission, and admit me into the company of the righteous.”
These are among the accounts of the unseen which We reveal to you. You were not with them when they plotted and agreed on a plan.
But most people, for all your eagerness, are not believers.
You ask them no wage for it. It is only a reminder to all people.
How many a sign in the heavens and the earth do they pass by, yet they turn away from them?
Most of them do not believe in Allah unless they associate others.
Do they feel secure that a covering of punishment from Allah will not come upon them? Or that the Hour will not come upon them suddenly, while they are unaware?
Say, “This is my way: I invite to Allah, based on clear knowledge—I, and whoever follows me. Glory be to Allah, and I am not of the associators.”
We did not send before you except men, whom We inspired, from the people of the towns. Have they not roamed the earth and seen the consequences for those before them? But the Home of the Hereafter is better for those who are righteous. Do you not understand?
Until, when the messengers have despaired and thought that they were rejected, Our help came to them. We save whomever We will, and Our severity is never averted from the guilty people.
In their stories is a lesson for those possessed of insight. This is not a fabricated tale, but a confirmation of what came before it, and a detailed explanation of all things, and guidance and mercy for people who believe.
Alif. Lam. Meem. Ra. These are the signs of the Book. What is revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, but most people do not believe.
Allah is He who raised the heavens without pillars that you see, then settled on the Throne. He regulated the sun and the moon, each orbiting until an appointed time. He governs the affair, and He explains the messages, so that you may be certain of the meeting with your Lord.
And it is He who spread the earth, and placed mountains and rivers upon it. And of every kind of fruit, He placed in it two kinds. He makes the night overlap the day. In this are signs for people who think.
And on earth are adjacent terrains, and gardens of grapes, and crops, and date-palms, from a shared root or from distinct roots, irrigated with the same water. And We make some better tasting than others. In this are proofs for people who reason.
Should you wonder—wondrous is their saying: “When we have become dust, will we be in a new creation?” It is they who disbelieved in their Lord; it is they who will have shackles around their necks; it is they who are the inhabitants of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
And they challenge you to hasten evil before good, although examples have passed before them. Your Lord is full of forgiveness towards people for their wrongdoing, yet your Lord is severe in retribution.
Those who disbelieve say, “If only a miracle could be sent down to him from his Lord.” You are only a warner; and for every community, there is a guide.
Allah knows what every female carries, and what increases and decreases in the wombs. Everything with Him is according to a measure.
The Knower of the Invisible and the Visible—the Grand, the Exalted.
It is the same; whether one of you conceals his speech, or declares it; whether he goes into hiding by night, or goes out by day.
He has a succession—in front of him, and behind him—protecting him by Allah’s command. Allah does not change the condition of a people until they change what is within themselves. And if Allah wills any hardship for a people, there is no repelling it. And apart from Him, they have no protector.
It is He who shows you the lightning, causing fear and hope. And He produces the heavy clouds.
The thunder praises His glory, as do the angels in awe of Him. And He sends thunderbolts, striking with them whom He wills. Yet they argue about Allah, while He is Tremendous in might.
To Him is the call of truth. Those they call upon below Him never respond to them with anything—except as someone who stretches his hands towards the water, so it may reach his mouth, but it does not reach it. The prayers of the unbelievers are only in vain.
To Allah prostrates everyone in the heavens and the earth, willingly or unwillingly, as do their shadows, in the mornings and the evenings.
Say, “Who is Lord of the heavens and the earth?” Say, “Allah.” Say, “Have you taken besides Him lords who can neither benefit nor harm themselves?” Say, “Are the blind and the seeing equal? Or are darkness and light equal? Or do they assign to Allah associates, who created the likes of His creation, so that creations seem alike to them?” Say, “Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is The One, the Irresistible.”
He sends down water from the sky, and riverbeds flow according to their capacity. The current carries swelling foam. And from what they heat in the fire of ornaments or tools comes a similar foam. Thus Allah exemplifies truth and falsehood. As for the foam, it is swept away, but what benefits people remains in the ground. Thus Allah presents the analogies.
For those who respond to their Lord, is the best. But as for those who do not respond to Him, even if they possessed everything on earth, and twice as much, they could not redeem themselves with it. These will have the worst reckoning, and their housing is Hell—a miserable place.
Is someone who knows that what was revealed to you from your Lord is the truth, like someone who is blind? Only those who possess intellect reflect.
Those who fulfill the promise to Allah, and do not violate the agreement.
And those who join what Allah has commanded to be joined, and fear their Lord, and dread the dire reckoning.
And those who patiently seek their Lord’s attention, and pray regularly, and donate from what We have provided for them—secretly and openly—and repel evil with good. For them, there is the Ultimate Home.
Everlasting Gardens, which they will enter, along with the righteous from among their parents, and their spouses, and their descendants. And the angels will enter upon them from every gate.
“Peace be upon you—because you were patient. How excellent is the Final Home.”
As for those who violate the promise to Allah, after pledging to keep it, and sever what Allah has commanded to be joined, and work corruption on earth: it is they who will have the curse, and theirs is the Worst Home.
Allah dispenses the sustenance to whomever He wills—and restricts. And they delight in the worldly life. Yet the worldly life, compared to the Hereafter, is nothing but enjoyment.
Those who disbelieve say, “Why a miracle was not sent down to him from his Lord.” Say, “Allah leads astray whom He wills, and He guides to Himself whoever turns in repentance.”
Those who believe, and whose hearts find comfort in the remembrance of Allah. Surely, it is in Allah’s remembrance that hearts find comfort.”
For those who believe and do good works: for them is happiness and a beautiful return.
Thus We sent you into a community before whom other communities have passed away, so that you may relate to them what We revealed to you. Yet they deny the Benevolent. Say, “He is my Lord; there is no god except He; in Him I trust, and to Him is my repentance.”
Even if there were a Quran, by which mountains could be set in motion, or by which the earth could be shattered, or by which the dead could be made to speak. In fact, every decision rests with Allah. Did the believers not give up, and realize, that had Allah willed, He would have guided all humanity? Disasters will continue to strike those who disbelieve—because of their deeds—or they fall close to their homes: until Allah’s promise comes true. Allah never breaks a promise.
Messengers before you were ridiculed, but I delayed the disbelievers, and then I seized them. What a retribution it was!
What of He who is Vigilant over the deeds of every soul? Yet they ascribe associates to Allah. Say, “Name them! Or are you informing Him of something He does not know on earth? Or is it a display of words?” In fact, the scheming of those who disbelieve is made appealing to them, and they are diverted from the path. Whomever Allah misguides has no guide.
For them is agony in the worldly life, but the agony of the Hereafter is harsher. And they have no defender against Allah.
The parable of the Garden promised to the righteous: rivers flowing beneath it; its food is everlasting, as is its shade. That is the outcome for those who guard. But the outcome for the unbelievers is the Fire.
Those to whom We gave the Scripture rejoice in what was revealed to you, while some factions reject parts of it. Say, “I am commanded to worship Allah, and to not ascribe partners to Him. To Him I invite, and to Him is my return.”
Thus We revealed it an Arabic code of law. Were you to follow their desires, after the knowledge that has come to you, you would have no protector against Allah, and no defender.
We sent messengers before you, and We assigned for them wives and offspring. No messenger could bring a sign without Allah’s permission. For every era is a scripture.
Allah abolishes whatever He wills, and He affirms, and with Him is the source of the Scripture.
Whether We show you some of what We have promised them, or We cause you to die—your duty is to inform, and judgment is Ours.
Do they not see how We deal with the earth, eroding it at its extremities? Allah decides—none can reverse His decision. And He is quick in settling accounts.
Those before them planned, but the entire plan is up to Allah. He knows what every soul commits, and the disbelievers will know to whom the Ultimate Home belongs.
Those who disbelieve say, “You were not sent.” Say, “Allah is a sufficient witness between you and me, as is whoever possesses knowledge of the Scripture.”
Alif. Lam. Ra. A Scripture that We revealed to you, so that you may bring people out of the darkness into light—by the will of their Lord—to the path of the Mighty, the Praised.
Allah—to Whom belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. And woe to the unbelievers from a severe punishment.
Those who prefer the present life over the Hereafter, and repel from Allah’s path, and seek to make it crooked—these are far astray.
We sent no messenger except in the language of his people, to make things clear for them. Allah leads astray whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
We sent Moses with Our signs: “Bring your people out of darkness into light, and remind them of the Days of Allah.” In this are signs for every patient, thankful person.”
Moses said to his people, “Remember Allah’s favors upon you, as He saved you from the people of Pharaoh, who inflicted terrible suffering on you, slaughtering your sons while sparing your women. In that was a severe trial from your Lord.”
And when your Lord announced: “If you give thanks, I will give you more; but if you are ungrateful, My punishment is severe.”
And Moses said, “Even if you are ungrateful, together with everyone on earth—Allah is in no need, Praised.”
Has not the story reached you, of those before you: the people of Noah, and Aad, and Thamood, and those after them? None knows them except Allah. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs, but they tried to silence them, and said, “We reject what you are sent with, and we are in serious doubt about what you are calling us to.”
Their messengers said, “Can there be any doubt about Allah, Maker of the heavens and the earth? He invites you to forgive you of your sins, and to defer you until an appointed time.” They said, “You are only humans like us; you want to turn us away from what our forefathers served; so bring us some compelling proof.”
Their messengers said to them, “We are only humans like you, but Allah favors whom He wills from among His servants. We cannot possibly bring you any proof, except with Allah’s permission. And in Allah, let the faithful put their trust.”
“And why should we not trust in Allah, when He has guided us in our ways? We will persevere in the face of your persecution. And upon Allah, the reliant should rely.”
Those who disbelieved said to their messengers, “We will expel you from our land—unless you return to our faith.” And their Lord inspired them: “We will destroy the wrongdoers.”
“And We will settle you in the land after them. This is for whoever fears My Majesty and fears My warnings.”
And they asked for victory, and every stubborn tyrant came to disappointment.
Beyond him lies Hell, and he will be made to drink putrid water.
He will guzzle it, but he will not swallow it. And death will come at him from every direction, but he will not die. And beyond this lies intense suffering.
The parable of those who disbelieve in their Lord: their works are as ashes, in a fierce wind, on a stormy day. They have no control over anything they have gained. That is the utmost misguidance.
Do you not see that Allah created the heavens and the earth with truth? If He wills, He can eliminate you, and produce a new creation.
And that is not difficult for Allah.
And they will emerge before Allah, all together. The weak will say to those who were proud, “We were your followers, so can you protect us from Allah’s punishment in any way?” They will say, “Had Allah guided us, we would have guided you. It is the same for us; whether we mourn, or endure patiently; for us, there is no asylum.”
And Satan will say, when judgment is passed, “Allah has promised you the promise of truth; and I promised you, but I failed you. I had no authority over you, except that I called you, and you responded to me. So do not blame me, but blame yourselves. I cannot respond to your cries, nor can you respond to my cries. I denounce your previous association of me. The wrongdoers will have a painful punishment.”
But those who believe and do righteous deeds will be admitted into gardens beneath which rivers flow, to remain there forever, with their Lord's permission. Their greeting there will be: “Peace.”
Do you not see how Allah presents a parable? A good word is like a good tree: its root is firm, and its branches are in the sky.
It yields its fruit every season, by the will of its Lord. Allah presents the parables to the people, so that they may reflect.
And the parable of a bad word is that of a bad tree: it is uprooted from the ground; it has no stability.
Allah gives firmness to those who believe, with the firm word, in this life, and in the Hereafter. And Allah leads the unjust astray. And Allah does whatever He wills.
Have you not seen those who exchange Allah’s blessings with blasphemy, and land their people into the house of perdition?
Hell—they will roast in it—what a miserable settlement.
And they set up rivals to Allah, to lead away from His Way. Say, “Enjoy yourselves! Your destination is the Fire.”
Tell My servants who have believed to perform the prayers, and to donate from what We have provided for them—secretly and publicly—before a Day comes in which there is neither bargaining nor friendship.
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth, and sent down water from the sky, causing fruits to grow for your sustenance. And He committed the ships to your service, sailing through the sea by His command, and He committed the rivers to your service.
And He committed the sun and the moon to your service, continuously, and He committed the night and the day to your service.
And He has given you something of all what you asked. And if you were to count Allah’s blessings, you could not enumerate them. The human being is unfair and ungrateful.
And recall that Abraham said, “O my Lord, make this land secure, and keep me and my children from worshiping idols.”
“My Lord, they have led many people astray. Whoever follows me, he is of me. And whoever disobeys me—You are Forgiving and Merciful.
“Our Lord, I have settled some of my descendants in a valley of no vegetation, by Your Sacred House, our Lord, so that they may perform the prayers. So make some people's hearts incline towards them, and provide them with fruits, so that they may give thanks.”
“Our Lord, You know what we hide and what we disclose. And nothing is hidden from Allah, on earth or in the heaven.”
“Praise be to Allah, Who has given me, in my old age, Ishmael and Isaac. My Lord is the Hearer of Prayers.”
“My Lord, make me a performer of prayer, and of my descendants. Our Lord, accept my prayers.”
“Our Lord, forgive me, and my parents, and the believers, on the Day the Reckoning takes place.”
Do not ever think that Allah is unaware of what the wrongdoers do. He only postpones them until a Day when the sights stare.
Their necks outstretched, their heads upraised, their gaze unblinking, their hearts void.
And warn the people of the Day when the punishment will come upon them, and those who did wrong will say, “Our Lord, delay us for a little while, and we will answer Your call, and follow the messengers.” Did you not swear before, that there would be no end for you?
And you inhabited the homes of those who wronged themselves, and it became clear to you how We dealt with them, and We presented for you the parables.
And they planned their plan, but their plan is with Allah, even if their plan can eliminate mountains.
Never think that Allah will break His promise to His messengers. Allah is Strong, Revengeful.
On the Day when the earth is changed into another earth—and the heavens—and they will emerge before Allah, the One, the Irresistible.
On that Day, you will see the guilty bound together in chains.
Their garments made of tar, and the fire covering their faces.
So that Allah may repay each soul for what it has committed. Allah is Swift in reckoning.
This is a proclamation for humanity, so that they may be warned thereby, and know that He is One God, and so that the possessors of intellect may reflect.
Alif. Lam. Ra. These are the signs of the Book, and a Quran that makes things clear.
Oftentimes those who disbelieve wish that they were Submitters.
Leave them to eat, and enjoy, and be lulled by hope. They will know.
Never did We destroy a town, but it had a known decree.
No community can bring its time forward, nor can they delay it.
And they said, “O you to whom the Message is revealed, you are insane.”
Why don’t you bring us the angels, if you are truthful?”
We do not send the angels down except with reason, and they will not be held back.
Surely We revealed the Message, and We will surely preserve it.
We sent messengers before you, to the former communities.
Yet no messenger came to them, but they ridiculed him.
Thus We slip it into the hearts of the guilty.
They do not believe in it, although the ways of the ancients have passed away.
Even if We opened for them a gateway into heaven, through which they continued to ascend.
They would say, “Our eyes are hallucinating. In fact, we must be bewitched.”
And We placed constellations in the sky, and We beautified them for the onlookers.
And We protected them from every outcast devil.
Except one who tries to eavesdrop and is pursued by a visible projectile.
And We spread the earth, and We placed stabilizers on it, and We caused everything to grow therein in perfect balance.
And We placed in it means of livelihood for you, and for those for whom you do not provide.
There is not a thing, but its stores are with Us, and We send it down only in a known measure.
And We send the winds, fertilizing, and We bring down water from the sky, and We give it to you to drink, and you are not the ones who store it.
It is We who give life and cause death, and We are the Inheritors.
And We know those among you who advance, and We know those who lag behind.
It is your Lord who will gather them together. He is Wise, Knowing.
We created the human being from clay, from molded mud.
And the jinn, We created before, from scorching fire.
Your Lord said to the angels, “I am creating a human being from clay, from molded mud.”
“When I have proportioned him, and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down in prostration to him.”
So the angels prostrated themselves, all of them together.
Except for Iblis. He refused to be with those who prostrated themselves.
He said, “O Iblis, what is the matter with you, that you did not join others in prostration?”
He said, “It is not for me to prostrate to a human whom You created from clay, from molded mud.”
He said, “Then get out of here, for you are an outcast.”
“And upon you is the curse, until the Day of Judgment.”
He said, “My Lord, delay me until the Day they are resurrected.”
He said, “You will be delayed.”
“Until the Day of the appointed time.”
He said, “My Lord, since You have lured me away, I will glamorize for them on earth, and I will lure them all away.”
“Except for Your chosen servants among them.”
He said, “This is a straight path, binding on Me.”
“Over My worshipers, you have no authority, except for the deviants who follow you.”
And Gehenna is the meeting-place for them all.
“It has seven gates: for each gate is an assigned class.”
But the righteous will be amid gardens and springs.
“Enter it in peace, secure.”
And We will remove whatever ill-feelings lie within their hearts—brethren, on thrones, facing one another.
No fatigue will ever touch them there, nor will they be asked to leave.
Inform My worshipers that I am the Forgiver, the Merciful.
And that My punishment is the painful punishment.
And inform them about Abraham’s guests.
When they entered his presence, and said, “Peace.” He said, “We are suspicious of you.”
They said, “Do not fear; we bring you good news of a boy endowed with knowledge.”
He said, “Do you bring me good news—when old age has overtaken me? What good news do you bring?”
They said, “We bring you good news in truth—so do not despair.”
He said, “And who despairs of his Lord’s mercy, except those who are astray?”
He said, “So what is your mission, O envoys?”
They said, “We were sent to a guilty people.”
“Except for Lot’s family—we will save them all.”
“Except for his wife.” We have determined that she will be among those who lag behind.”
And when the envoys came to Lot’s family.
He said, “You are a people unknown to me.”
They said, “We bring you what they used to doubt.”
“And we come to you with the truth, and we are truthful.”
“So travel with your family in the dark of night, and follow behind them, and let none of you look back, and proceed as commanded.”
And We revealed to him this decree: “The last remnant of these will be uprooted early morning.”
And the people of the city came, rejoicing.
He said, “These are my guests, so do not embarrass me.”
“And fear Allah, and do not humiliate me.”
They said, “Did we not forbid you from strangers?”
He said, “These are my daughters—if you must act.”
By your life, they were blundering in their drunkenness.
So the Blast struck them at sunrise.
And We turned it upside down, and We rained down on them stones of baked clay.
Surely in this are lessons for those who discern.
And it is on an existing road.
Surely in this is a sign for the believers.
And the inhabitants of the Woods were wrongdoers.
So We took vengeance upon them. Both are clearly documented.
And the inhabitants of the Rock rejected the messengers.
We gave them Our revelations, but they turned away from them.
They used to carve dwellings in the mountains, feeling secure.
But the Blast struck them in the morning.
All that they had acquired was of no avail to them.
We did not create the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, except for a purpose. The Hour is coming, so forgive with gracious forgiveness.
Your Lord is the All-Knowing Creator.
We have given you seven of the pairs, and the Grand Quran.
Do not extend your eyes towards what We have bestowed on some classes of them to enjoy, nor grieve over them; and lower your wing to the believers.
And say, “I am the clear warner.”
Just as We sent down to the separatists.
Those who made the Quran obsolete.
By your Lord, we will question them all.
About what they used to do.
So proclaim openly what you are commanded, and turn away from the associators.
We are enough for you against the mockers.
Those who set up another god with Allah. They will come to know.
We are aware that your heart is distressed by what they say.
So glorify the praises of your Lord, and be among those who prostrate.
And worship your Lord until you attain certainty.
The command of Allah has come, so do not rush it. Glorified and Exalted is He, above what they associate.
He sends down the angels with the Spirit by His command, upon whom He wills of His servants: “Give warning that there is no god except I, and be conscious of Me.”
He created the heavens and the earth with justice. Exalted is He above the partners they ascribe.
He created the human being from a drop, and he becomes an open adversary.
And the livestock—He created them for you. In them is warmth and benefits for you; and of them, you eat.
And there is beauty in them for you, when you bring them home, and when you take them out to pasture.
And they carry your loads to a territory you could not reach without significant hardship. Your Lord is Gentle and Merciful.
And horses, and mules, and donkeys—for you to ride, and for luxury. And He creates what you do not know.
It is upon Allah to point out the path, but some of them are deviant. Had He willed, He would have guided you all.
It is He Who sends down water from the sky, from which you have drink. And with it grows vegetation for grazing.
And He produces for you grains, and olives, and date-palms, and grapevines, and every kind of fruit. Surely in this is a sign for people who think.
And He regulated the night and the day for you, and the sun, and the moon. And the stars are governed by His laws. Surely in this are signs for people who comprehend.
And whatever He created for you on earth is of diverse colors. Surely in this is a sign for people who notice.
And it is He who made the sea subservient, so that you may eat tender meat from it, and extract from it ornaments that you wear. And you see the ships plowing through it, so that you may seek His bounties, so that you may give thanks.
And He placed mountains on earth, lest it shifts with you; and rivers, and pathways, so that you may be guided.
And landmarks. And by the stars, they are guided.
Is He Who creates, like he who does not create? Will you not reflect?
And if you were to count Allah’s favors, you could not number them. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
And Allah knows what you hide and what you disclose.
But those whom they call upon apart from Allah create nothing, and are themselves created.
They are dead, lifeless, and they do not know when they will be resurrected.
Your God is one God. As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter: their hearts are in denial, and they are arrogant.
Undoubtedly Allah knows what they hide and what they disclose. He does not like the arrogant.
And when it is said to them, “What did your Lord send down?” They will say, “Legends of the ancients.”
Let them carry their loads in full on the Day of Resurrection, and some of the loads of those they misled without knowledge. Evil is what they carry.
Those before them also plotted, but Allah came upon their buildings from the foundations, and the roof fell down on them from above them, and the punishment came at them from where they did not expect.
Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will disgrace them, and say, “Where are My partners on whose account you were defiant?” Those who were given knowledge will say, “Today, shame and misery are upon the unbelievers.”
Those wronging themselves while the angels are taking them away will offer peace: “We were not doing any evil.” “Yes, you were. Allah is fully aware of what you used to do.”
So enter the gates of Hell, to dwell there forever. Miserable is the residence of the arrogant.
And it will be said to those who maintained piety, “What did your Lord send down?” They will say, “Goodness.” For those who are virtuous in this world, there is goodness. And the Home of the Hereafter is better. How wonderful is the residence of the reverent!
The Gardens of Eternity, which they will enter, beneath which rivers flow, where they will have whatever they please. Thus Allah rewards the righteous.
Those who are in a wholesome state while the angels are taking them—they will say, “Peace be upon you. Enter Paradise, for what you used to do.”
Are they only waiting for the angels to come to them, or for your Lord’s command to arrive? Those before them did likewise. Allah never wronged them, but they used to wrong themselves.
So the evils of their deeds assailed them, and what they used to ridicule engulfed them.
Those who associate say, “Had Allah willed, we would not have worshiped anything besides Him—neither us nor our ancestors—nor would we have prohibited anything besides His prohibitions.” Those before them did likewise. Are the messengers responsible for anything but clear communication?
We sent a messenger to every community: “Worship Allah, and avoid idolatry.” Some of them Allah guided, while others deserved misguidance. So travel through the earth, and see what the fate of the deniers was.
Even though you are keen on their guidance, Allah does not guide those who lead astray, and there are no helpers for them.
And they swear by Allah, with their most solemn oaths: “Allah will not resurrect anyone who dies.” Yes indeed, it is a promise binding on Him, but most people do not know.
To make clear for them what they differed about, and for the faithless to know that they were liars.
When We intend for something to happen, We say to it, “Be,” and it becomes.
Those who emigrate for Allah’s sake after being persecuted, We will settle them in a good place in this world. But the reward of the Hereafter is greater—if they only knew.
Those who are patient and trust in their Lord.
We sent no messengers before you, except men whom We inspired. Ask the people of the Reminder, if you do not know.
With the clarifications and the Divine Books. And We revealed the Reminder to you, so that you may explain to people what was revealed to them, and so that they may think.
Do those who plot evil feel secure that Allah will not cause the earth to cave in with them? Or that the punishment will not come at them from where they do not perceive?
Or that He will not seize them while they go about? They cannot prevent it.
Or that He will not seize them while in dread? Your Lord is Kind and Merciful.
Have they not considered that whatever Allah created casts its shadow to the right and to the left, prostrating to Allah, as they shrink away?
To Allah prostrates whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth: every living creature, and the angels, and with no pride.
They fear their Lord above them, and they do whatever they are commanded.
And Allah says: “Do not take up two gods. He is only One God. So be in awe of Me.”
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and the earth. And religion belongs to Him forever. Will you then revere something other than Allah?
Whatever blessing you have, is from Allah. Then, when harm touches you, it is to Him that you groan.
But when He lifts the harm from you, some of you associate others with their Lord.
To show ingratitude for what We have given them. Enjoy yourselves. You will soon know.
And they allocate, to something they do not know, a share of what We have provided for them. By Allah, you will be questioned about what you used to fabricate.
And they attribute daughters to Allah—glory be to Him—and for themselves what they desire.
And when one of them receives news of a female, his face darkens, and he chokes with grief.
He hides from the people because of the bad news he was given. Should he keep her in disgrace, or bury her in the dust? Evil is the decision they make.
Those who do not believe in the Hereafter set a bad example, while Allah sets the Highest Example. He is the Powerful, the Wise.
If Allah were to hold the people for their injustices, He would not leave upon it a single creature, but He postpones them until an appointed time. Then, when their time arrives, they will not delay it by one hour, nor will they advance it.
And they attribute to Allah what they dislike, while their tongues utter the lie that theirs is the best. Without a doubt, for them is the Fire, and they will be disregarded.
By Allah, We sent messengers to communities before you, but Satan beautified their actions for them. He is their master today, and they will have a painful punishment.
We did not reveal the Scripture to you, except that you may clarify for them what they differ about, and guidance and mercy for people who believe.
Allah sends down water from the sky, and with it, He revives the earth after its death. Surely in this is a sign for people who listen.
And there is a lesson for you in livestock: We give you a drink from their bellies—from between waste and blood, pure milk, pleasant to the drinkers.
And from the fruits of date-palms and grapevines, you derive sugar and wholesome food. Surely in this is a sign for people who understand.
And your Lord inspired the bee: “Set up hives in the mountains, and in the trees, and in what they construct.”
Then eat from all the fruits, and go along the pathways of your Lord, with precision. From their bellies emerges a fluid of varying colors, containing healing for people. Surely in this is a sign for people who reflect.
And Allah created you; then He makes you die. Some of you will be returned to the meanest age, so that he will no longer learn, after having acquired knowledge. Allah is All-Knowing, Most Capable.
And Allah has favored some of you over others in livelihood. Those who are favored would not give away their wealth to their servants, to the extent of making them equal in it. Will they renounce Allah’s favors?
And Allah made for you spouses from yourselves. And He produced for you, from your spouses, children, and grandchildren. And He provided you with good things. Will they believe in falsehood and show ingratitude for Allah’s blessings?
And yet, they serve besides Allah what possesses no sustenance for them in the heavens, nor on earth—and they are not capable.
So do not cite the examples for Allah. Allah knows, and you do not know.
Allah cites the example of an enslaved servant, who has no power over anything; and someone to whom We have given plentiful provision, from which he spends secretly and openly. Are they equal in comparison? Praise be to Allah, but most of them do not know.
And Allah cites the example of two men: one of them is dumb, incapable of anything, a burden on his master. Whichever way he directs him, he achieves nothing good. Is he equal to the one who commands justice and is on a straight path?
To Allah belongs the hidden of the heavens and the earth. The coming of the Hour is only as the blink of the eye, or even nearer. Allah is Capable of everything.
And Allah brought you out of your mothers’ wombs, not knowing anything. And He gave you hearing, and eyesight, and brains—so you may give thanks.
Have they not considered the birds, made subservient in midair? None sustains them except Allah. Surely in this are signs for people who believe.
And Allah has given you in your homes habitats for you, and He has given you portable homes from the hide of animals, light to handle when you travel and when you camp. And from their wool, and fur, and hair: furnishings and goods for a while.
And Allah has provided you with shade from what He created. And He has given you resorts in the mountains. And He has provided you with clothes that protect you from the heat, and armor that protects you from your brutality. Thus He completes His blessings upon you, so that you may submit.
But if they turn away—your only duty is to deliver clearly.
They recognize the blessing of Allah, then they deny it, as most of them are ungrateful.
On the Day when We raise up a witness from every community. Then those who disbelieved will not be allowed, nor will they be excused.
And when those who did wrong see the punishment, it will not be reduced for them, nor will they be delayed.
And when those who ascribed partners see the partners they ascribed, they will say, “Our Lord, these are our partners whom we used to call upon besides You.” And they will throw at them the words, “You are liars.”
On that Day, they will offer their submission to Allah, and what they had invented will abandon them.
Those who disbelieve and obstruct from Allah’s path—We will add punishment to their punishment, on account of the mischief they used to make.
On the Day when We raise from every community a witness against them, from among them, and We bring you as a witness against these. We have revealed to you the Book, explaining all things—and guidance, and mercy, and good news for those who submit.
Allah commands justice, goodness, and generosity towards relatives. And He forbids immorality, injustice, and oppression. He instructs you, so that you may remember.
Fulfill your promise to Allah when you make a promise, and do not break your oaths after confirming them, having made Allah your guarantor—Allah knows whatever you do.
And do not be like her who unravels her yarn, breaking it after it was strong: using your oaths as means of deceiving one another, so that one community may be more prosperous than another. Allah is testing you by this. And on the Day of Resurrection, He will clarify for you everything you differed about.
Had Allah willed, He would have made you a single community. But He leads astray whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. And you will be questioned about what you used to do.
And do not use your oaths as means of deceiving one another, lest a foot slips after being firm, and you taste misery because you hindered from Allah’s path, and you suffer a terrible punishment.
And do not sell your promise to Allah for a small price. What is with Allah is better for you—if you only knew.
Whatever you have runs out, but whatever Allah has is everlasting. And We will reward those who are patient according to the best of their deeds.
Whoever works righteousness, whether male or female, while being a believer, We will give him a good life—and We will reward them according to the best of what they used to do.
When you read the Quran, seek refuge with Allah from Satan the outcast.
He has no authority over those who believe and trust in their Lord.
His authority is only over those who follow him, and those who associate others with Him.
When We substitute a verse with another verse—and Allah knows best what He reveals—they say, “You are a fraud.” But most of them do not know.
Say, “The Holy Spirit brought it down from your Lord, with the truth, to stabilize those who believe, and as guidance and good news for those who submit.”
And We are well aware that they say, “It is a human who teaches him.” But the language of the person they implicate is foreign, while this is clear Arabic language.
Those who do not believe in the signs of Allah—Allah will not guide them, and for them is a painful punishment.
It is those who do not believe in Allah’s revelations who fabricate lies. These are the liars.
Whoever disbelieves in Allah after having believed—except someone who is coerced, while his heart is at peace in faith—but whoever willingly opens up his heart to disbelief, upon them falls wrath from Allah, and for them is a tremendous punishment.
That is because they preferred the worldly life over the Hereafter, and because Allah does not guide the disbelieving people.
It is they whom Allah has sealed their hearts, and their hearing, and their sight. It is they who are the heedless.
Without a doubt: in the Hereafter, they will be the losers.
But then, your Lord—for those who migrated after being persecuted, then struggled and persevered—your Lord thereafter is Forgiving and Merciful.
On the Day when every soul will come pleading for itself, and every soul will be paid in full for what it did, and they will not be wronged.
And Allah cites an example: a town safe and at peace. Its livelihood coming to it abundantly from every direction. But it turned unappreciative of Allah’s favors, so Allah made it taste the robe of hunger and fear, because of what they used to craft.
A messenger from among them had come to them, but they denounced him, so the punishment seized them in the midst of their wrongdoing.
So eat from the lawful and good things Allah provided for you, and be thankful for Allah’s favor—if it is Him that you worship.
He has forbidden you carrion, and blood, and the flesh of swine, and anything consecrated to other than Allah. But if someone is compelled by necessity—neither driven by desire nor exceeding—then Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
And do not say of falsehood asserted by your tongues, “This is lawful and this is unlawful.” To invent lies and attribute them to Allah. Those who invent lies and attribute them to Allah will never succeed.
A little enjoyment—then they will have a painful punishment.
And for those who are Jews: We prohibited what We related to you previously. We did not wrong them, but they used to wrong themselves.
But towards those who do wrongs in ignorance, and then repent afterward and reform: your Lord thereafter is Forgiving and Merciful.
Abraham was an exemplary leader, devoted to Allah, a monotheist, and was not of the polytheists.
Thankful for His blessings. He chose him and guided him to a straight path.
And We gave him good in this world. And in the Hereafter, he will be among the righteous.
Then We inspired you: “Follow the faith of Abraham, a Monotheist. And he was not of the polytheists.”
The Sabbath was ordained only for those who disagreed about it. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their disputes.
Invite to your Lord’s Way with wisdom and good advice, and debate with them in the most dignified manner. Your Lord is aware of those who stray from His path, and He is aware of those who are guided.
And if you were to retaliate, retaliate to the same degree as the injury done to you. But if you resort to patience—it is better for the patient.
So be patient. Your patience is only from Allah. And do not grieve over them, nor be distressed by their schemes.
Allah is with those who are righteous and those who are virtuous.
Glory be to Him, Who journeyed His servant by night, from the Sacred Mosque to the Farthest Mosque, whose precincts We have blessed, to show him of Our wonders. He is the Listener, the Beholder.
And We gave Moses the Scripture, and We made it a guidance for the Children of Israel: Take no guardian apart from Me.
The descendants of those We carried with Noah. He was an appreciative servant.
And We declared for the Children of Israel in the Scripture: You will commit corruption on earth twice, and you will rise to a great height.
When the first of the two promises came true, We sent against you servants of Ours, possessing great might, and they ransacked your homes. It was a promise fulfilled.
Then We gave you a turn against them, and We supplied you with wealth and children, and We made you more numerous.
If you work righteousness, you work righteousness for yourselves; and if you commit evil, you do so against yourselves. Then, when the second promise comes true, they will make your faces filled with sorrow, and will enter the Temple as they entered it the first time, and will utterly destroy all that falls into their power.
Perhaps your Lord will have mercy on you. And if you return, We will return. And We made Hell a prison for the unbelievers.
This Quran guides to what is most upright. And it gives good news to the believers who do good deeds, that they will have a great reward.
And those who do not believe in the Hereafter—We have prepared for them a painful punishment.
The human being prays for evil as he prays for good. The human being is ever hasty.
And We made the night and the day two wonders. We erased the wonder of the night, and We made the wonder of the day revealing, so that you may seek bounty from your Lord, and know the number of years and the calculation. We explained everything in detail.
And We attached every person’s deeds to his neck. And on the Day of Resurrection, We will bring out for him a book which he will find wide open.
“Read your book! Today, you are sufficient to call yourself to account.”
Whoever is guided—is guided for his own good. And whoever goes astray—goes astray to his detriment. No burdened soul carries the burdens of another, nor do We ever punish until We have sent a messenger.
And when We intend to destroy a town, We command its affluent ones; they transgress in it, so the word becomes justified against it, and We destroy it utterly.
How many generations have We destroyed after Noah? Your Lord is sufficient as Knower and Beholder of the sins of his servants.
Whoever desires the fleeting life, We expedite for him what We decide to give him, to whomever We will. Then We consign him to Gehenna, where he will roast, condemned and defeated.
But whoever desires the Hereafter, and pursues it as it should be pursued, while he is a believer; these—their efforts will be appreciated.
To all—these and those—We extend from the gifts of your Lord. Your Lord’s gifts are not restricted.
Observe how We have favored some of them over others. Yet the Hereafter is greater in ranking and greater in preference.
Do not set up with Allah another god, lest you become condemned and damned.
Your Lord has commanded that you worship none but Him, and to be good to your parents. If either of them, or both of them, reaches old age with you: do not say to them words of disrespect, nor scold them, but speak to them respectfully.
And lower to them the wing of humility, out of mercy, and say, “My Lord, have mercy on them, as they raised me from childhood.”
Your Lord knows best what is within you. If you are righteous—He is Forgiving to the repentant.
And give the relative his rights, and the poor, and the wayfarer. And do not squander wastefully.
The extravagant are brethren of the devils, and Satan is ever ungrateful to his Lord.
But if you turn away from them, seeking mercy from your Lord which you hope for, say to them comforting words.
And do not keep your hand tied to your neck, nor spread it out entirely, lest you end up liable and regretful.
Your Lord extends the provision to whomever He wills, and He restricts it. He is fully Informed, Observant of His servants.
And do not kill your children for fear of poverty. We provide for them, and for you. Killing them is a heinous sin.
And do not go near adultery. It is immoral, and an evil way.
And do not kill the soul which Allah has made sacred, except in the pursuit of justice. If someone is killed unjustly, We have given his next of kin authority. But he should not be excessive in taking life, for he will be supported.
And do not go near the orphan’s wealth, except with the best of intentions, until he has reached maturity. And honor your pledges: a promise involves responsibility.
And give full measure when you measure. And weigh with accurate scales. That is fairer, and the best determination.
And do not follow what you have no knowledge of. The hearing, the sight, and the intellect—all these will be questioned.
And do not walk on the earth arrogantly. You can neither penetrate the earth, nor can you reach the mountains in height.
The evil of all these is disliked by your Lord.
That is from the wisdom your Lord has revealed to you. And do not set up another god with Allah, lest you be thrown in Hell, rebuked and banished.
Has your Lord favored you with sons, while choosing for Himself females from among the angels? You are making an outrageous claim.
We have explained in this Quran in various ways, so that they may reflect. But it only adds to their rebellion.
Say, “If there were other gods with Him—as they say—they would have sought a way to the Lord of the Throne.”
Glorified be He! He is exalted, far above what they say.
Praising Him are the seven heavens, and the earth, and everyone in them. There is not a thing that does not glorify Him with praise, but you do not understand their praises. He is Patient and Forgiving.
When you read the Quran, We place between you and those who do not believe in the Hereafter a hidden veil.
And We drape coverings over their hearts—leaving them unable to understand it—and deafness in their ears. And when you mention your Lord’s oneness in the Quran, they turn their backs in disgust.
We know better what they listen to, when they listen to you, as they conspire, when the wrongdoers say, “You follow nothing but a man bewitched.”
Note what they compared you to. They are lost, and unable to find a way.
And they say: “When we have become bones and fragments, shall we be raised as a new creation?”
Say, “Even if you become rocks or iron.
Or some substance, which in your minds, is even harder.” Then they will say, “Who will restore us?” Say, “He who originated you the first time.” Then they will nod their heads at you, and say, “When will it be?” Say, “It may well be soon.”
On the Day when He calls you, you will respond with His praise, and you will realize that you stayed for only a little while.
Tell My worshipers to say what is best. Satan sows discord among them. Satan is to the human being an obvious enemy.
Your Lord knows you best. If He wills, He will have mercy on you; and if He wills, He will punish you. We did not send you as their advocate.
Your Lord knows well everyone in the heavens and the earth. We have given some prophets advantage over others. And to David, We gave the Psalms.
Say, “Call upon those you claim besides Him. They have no power to relieve your adversity, nor can they change it.”
Those they call upon are themselves seeking means to their Lord, vying to be nearer, hoping for His mercy, and fearing His punishment. Your Lord’s punishment is to be avoided.
There is no town, but We will destroy before the Day of Resurrection, or punish it with severe punishment. That is inscribed in the Book.
Nothing prevents Us from sending miracles, except that the ancients denied them. And We gave Thamood the female camel, an eye-opener, but they mistreated her. We do not send signs, except to instill reverence.
We told you that your Lord encompasses humanity. We did not make the vision that We showed you, except as a test for the people, and the Cursed Tree in the Quran. We frighten them, but it only increases them in defiance.
And We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam,” so they prostrated, except for Iblis. He said, “Should I prostrate before someone You created from mud?”
He said, “Do You see this one that You honored over me? If You delay me until the Day of Resurrection, I will bring his descendants under my sway, except for a few.”
He said, “Begone! Whoever among them follows you—Hell is your repayment, an ample repayment.”
“And entice whomever you can among them with your voice, and mobilize against them your cavalry and your infantry, and share with them in wealth and children, and make promises to them.” But Satan promises them nothing but delusion.
“As for My devotees, you have no authority over them.” Sufficient is your Lord as a Guardian.
Your Lord is He who propels for you the ships at sea, so you may seek of His bounty. He is towards you Most Merciful.
When harm afflicts you at sea, those you pray to vanish, except for Him. But when He has saved you to shore, you turn away. The human being is ungrateful.
Do you feel secure that He will not cause a tract of land to cave in beneath you, or unleash a tornado against you? Then you will find none to protect you.
Or do you feel secure that He will not return you to it once again, and unleash a hurricane against you, and drown you for your ingratitude? Then you will find no supporter against Us.
We have honored the Children of Adam, and We carried them on land and sea, and We provided them with good things, and We greatly favored them over many of those We created.
On the Day when We call every people by their leader. Whoever is given his record in his right hand—these will read their record, and they will not be wronged one bit.
But whoever is blind in this, will be blind in the Hereafter, and further astray from the way.
They almost lured you away from what We revealed to you, hoping that you would falsely attribute something else to Us. In that case, they would have taken you for a friend.
Had We not given you stability, you might have inclined towards them a little.
Then We would have made you taste double in life, and double at death, and you would have found for yourself no helper against Us.
And they almost provoked you, to expel you from the land. But then they would not have lasted after you, except for a short while.
The pattern of those among Our messengers whom We sent before you. You will find no change in Our pattern.
Perform the prayer at the decline of the sun, until the darkness of the night; and the Quran at dawn. The Quran at dawn is witnessed.
And keep vigil with it during parts of the night, offering additional prayers, so your Lord may raise you to a worthy position.
And say, “My Lord, lead me in through an entrance of truth, and lead me out through an exit of truth. And grant me, from Yourself, a supporting authority.”
And say, “The truth has come, and falsehood has withered away. Falsehood is bound to wither away.”
We send down in the Quran healing and mercy for believers. And it increases the wrongdoers in nothing but loss.
When We bless the human being, he turns away and distances himself. But when adversity touches him—he is in despair.
Say, “Each does according to his disposition. Your Lord knows best who is better guided in the way.”
And they ask you about the Spirit. Say, “The Spirit belongs to the domain of my Lord, and you were given only a little knowledge.”
If We willed, We could take away what We revealed to you. Then you will find for yourself no protecting guardian against Us.
Except through mercy from your Lord. His favor upon you is immense.
Say, “If humankind and jinn banded together to produce the like of this Quran, they could never produce the like of it, even if they supported one another.”
We have displayed for the people in this Quran every kind of similitude, but most people persist in disbelief.
And they said, “We will not believe you unless you make a spring burst from the ground for us.
Or you have a garden of date-palms and grapevines; then cause rivers to gush pouring through them.
Or you cause the sky to fall on us in pieces, as you claim, or you bring Allah and the angels before us.
Or you possess a house of gold. Or you ascend up the sky. Even then, we will not believe in your ascension, unless you bring down for us a book that we can read.” Say, “Glory be to my Lord! Am I anything but a human messenger?”
Nothing prevented the people from believing, when guidance has come to them, except that they said, “Did Allah send a human messenger?”
Say, “If there were angels on earth, walking around in peace, We would have sent down to them from heaven an angel messenger.”
Say, “Allah is enough as a witness between me and you. He is fully aware of His servants, and He sees them well.”
Whomever Allah guides is the guided one. And whomever He leaves astray—you will find no guardians for them besides Him. And We will drag them on their faces on the Day of Resurrection—blind, dumb, and deaf. Their housing is hell. Whenever it abates, We will intensify the blaze for them.
That is their payback for having rejected Our revelations, and having said, “When we are reduced to bones and fragments, will we be raised as a new creation?”
Do they not consider that Allah, Who created the heavens and the earth, is able to create the likes of them? He has assigned for them a time, about which there is no doubt. But the wrongdoers persist in denial.
Say, “If you possessed the treasuries of my Lord’s mercy, you would have withheld, for fear of spending.” The human being has always been stingy.
We gave Moses nine clear miracles—so ask the Children of Israel. When he came to them, Pharaoh said to him, “I think that you, Moses, are bewitched.”
He said, “You certainly know that none sent these down except the Lord of the heavens and the earth: eye-openers. And I think that you, O Pharaoh, are doomed.”
He resolved to scare them off the land, but We drowned him, and those with him, all together.
And after him, We said to the Children of Israel, “Inhabit the land, and when the promise of the Hereafter arrives, We will bring you all together.”
In truth, We sent it down. And with the truth, it descended. We sent you only as a deliverer of good news and a warner.
A Quran which We unfolded gradually, so you may read it to people over time. And We revealed it in stages.
Say, “Believe in it, or do not believe.” Those who were given knowledge before it, when it is read to them, they fall to their chins, in prostration.
And they say, “Glory to our Lord. The promise of our Lord has been fulfilled.”
And they fall to their chins, weeping, and it adds to their humility.
Say, “Call upon Allah, or call upon the Compassionate. Whichever you call upon, He has the Most Beautiful Names.” And be neither loud in your prayer, nor silent in it, but seek a way in between.
And say, “Praise be to Allah, who has not begotten a child, nor has He a partner in sovereignty, nor has He an ally out of weakness, and proclaim His Greatness!”
Praise be to Allah, who revealed the Book to His servant, and allowed no distortion in it.
Valuable—to warn of severe punishment from Himself; and to give good news to the believers who do good works, that they will have an excellent reward.
In which they will remain forever.
And to warn those who say, “Allah has begotten a son.”
They have no knowledge of this, nor did their forefathers. Grave is the word that comes out of their mouths—they say nothing but a lie.
Perhaps you may destroy yourself with grief, chasing after them, if they do not believe in this information.
We made what is on earth a decoration for it, to test them, as to which of them is better in conduct.
And We will reduce whatever is on it into a barren wasteland.
Did you think that the Inhabitants of the Cave and the Inscription were of Our wondrous signs?
When the youths took shelter in the cave, they said, “Our Lord, give us mercy from Your Presence, and bless our affair with guidance.”
Then We sealed their ears in the cave for a number of years.
Then We awakened them, to know which of the two groups would better estimate the length of their stay.
We relate to you their story in truth. They were youths who believed in their Lord, and We increased them in guidance.
And We strengthened their hearts, as they stood up and said, “Our Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth. We will never call upon any god besides Him, for then we would be uttering an outrage.”
“These, our people, have taken gods below Him. Why don’t they produce clear proof of them? Who does more wrong than he who invents lies and attributes them to Allah?”
“Now that you distanced yourselves from them, and from what they worship besides Allah, take shelter in the cave. Your Lord will unfold His mercy on you, and will set your affair towards ease.”
And you would have seen the sun, when it rose, veering away from their cave towards the right; and when it sets, veering away from them to the left, as they lay in the cave's midst. That is among the wonders of Allah. Whomever Allah guides is rightly guided. But whomever He leaves to stray, you will never find for him a guiding mentor.
And you would think them awake, although they were asleep. And We turned them over to the right, and to the left, and their dog stretching its paws at the threshold. Had you looked at them, you would have fled away from them, filled with fear.
Even so, We awakened them, so that they may ask one another. A spokesperson among them said, “How long have you stayed?” They said, “We have stayed a day or part of a day.” They said, “Your Lord knows best how long you have stayed.” “Send one of you to the city, with this money of yours, and let him see which food is most suitable, and let him bring you some supply from it. And let him be discrete—and make no one aware of you.”
“If they discover you, they will stone you, or force you back into their religion, and then you will never succeed.”
And so it was, that We caused them to be discovered. So that they would know that Allah’s promise is true—and that there is no doubt about the Hour. As they were arguing their case among themselves, they said, “Build a structure over them.” Their Lord knows best about them. But those who prevailed over their case said, “We will build a place of worship over them.”
They will say, “Three, and their fourth being their dog.” And they will say, “Five, and their sixth being their dog,” guessing at the unknown. And they will say, “Seven, and their eighth being their dog.” Say, “My Lord knows best their number.” None knows them except a few. So do not argue about them except with sure knowledge, nor consult any of them about them.
And never say about anything, “I will do that tomorrow.”
Without adding, “Allah willing.” And remember your Lord when you forget, and say, “Perhaps my Lord will guide me to nearer than this in integrity.”
And they remained in their cave for three hundred years, adding nine.
Say, “Allah knows best how long they remained.” To Him belongs the mystery of the heavens and the earth. How well He sees. How well He hears. They have no guardian other than Him, and He shares His Sovereignty with no one.
And read what was revealed to you from your Lord’s Book. There is no changing His words. And you will find no refuge, except with Him.
And content yourself with those who pray to their Lord morning and evening, desiring His Attention. And do not turn your eyes away from them, desiring the glitter of this world. And do not obey him whose heart We made oblivious to Our remembrance—so he follows his own whims, and his priorities are confused.
And say, “The truth is from your Lord. Whoever wills—let him believe. And whoever wills—let him disbelieve”. We have prepared for the unjust a Fire, whose curtains will hem them in. And when they plead for relief, they will be relieved with water like molten metal, which scalds the faces. What a horrible drink, and what an evil resting-place.
As for those who believe and do good deeds—We will not waste the reward of those who work righteousness.
It is they who will have the Gardens of Eden, beneath which rivers flow. There they will be adorned with bracelets of gold, and will wear green garments of silk and brocade, reclining on couches. What a wonderful reward, and what an excellent resting-place.
And cite for them the parable of two men: To one of them, We granted two vineyards, and We surrounded them with date-palms, and We placed between them crops.
Both gardens produced their harvest, never falling short, and We made a river gush through them.
And he had other resources. He said to his friend, as he conversed with him, “I am more wealthy, and superior in manpower.”
And he entered his garden while wronging himself, saying, “I do not think this will ever perish.”
“And I do not think the Hour is coming. And even if I am returned to my Lord, I will find something better than this in return.”
His friend said to him, as he conversed with him, “Are you being ungrateful to Him who created you from dust, then from a drop, then evolved you into a man?
But as for me: He is Allah, my Lord, and I never associate anyone with my Lord.
If only, when you entered your garden, you said, ‘This is what Allah has willed. There is no power except through Allah.’ Even though you see me inferior to you in wealth and children.
Perhaps my Lord will give me something better than your garden, and unleash against it a thunderbolt from the sky, so it becomes a slippery wasteland.
Or its water dries up, and you can never reclaim it.”
And ruin closed in on his crops. And so he began wringing his hands over what he had invested in it, as it lays collapsed on its trellises, and he was saying, “I wish I never associated anyone with my Lord.”
He had no manpower to help him besides Allah, nor could he help himself.
That is because authority belongs to Allah, the Real. He is Best in rewarding, and Best for consequence.
And cite for them the parable of the present life: like water that We send down from the sky; and is absorbed by the plants of the earth; then it becomes debris, scattered by the winds. Allah has absolute power over everything.
Wealth and children are the decorations of the present life. But the things that last, the virtuous deeds, are better with your Lord for reward, and better for hope.
On the Day when We set the mountains in motion, and you see the earth emerging, and We gather them together, and leave none of them behind.
They will be presented before your Lord in a row. “You have come to Us as We created you the first time. Although you claimed that We will not set an appointment for you.”
And the book will be placed, and you will see the guilty fearful of its contents. And they will say, “Woe to us! What is with this book that leaves nothing, small or big, but it has enumerated it?” They will find everything they had done present. Your Lord never wrongs anyone.
And We said to the angels, “Prostrate before Adam.” So they prostrated, except for Iblis. He was of the jinn, and he deviated from the command of his Lord. Will you take him and his descendants as friends instead of Me, although they are your enemy? What an evil alternative for the wrongdoers!
I never called them to witness the creation of the heavens and the earth, nor their own creation, nor would I take the misleaders as assistants.
On the Day when He says, “Call upon those you claimed were My associates.” So they will call on them, but they will not answer them. And We will place a cliff between them.
And the criminals will see the Fire, and realize that they will tumble into it. And they will find no deliverance from it.
We have elaborated in this Quran for the people every kind of example, but the human being is a most argumentative being.
What prevented people from believing, when guidance has come to them, and from seeking their Lord’s forgiveness? Unless they are waiting for the precedent of the ancients to befall them, or to have the punishment come upon them face-to-face.
We do not send the messengers, except as deliverers of good news and warners. Those who disbelieve argue with false arguments, to discredit the truth with it. They take My Verses, and the warnings, for a joke.
And who does more wrong than he, who, when reminded of his Lord’s revelations, turns away from them, and forgets what his hands have forwarded? We have placed coverings over their hearts—leaving them unable to understand it—and deafness in their ears. And if you invite them to guidance, they will not be guided, ever.
And your Lord is the Forgiver, Full of Mercy. If He were to call them to account for what they have committed, He would have rushed the punishment for them. But they have an appointment from which they will find no escape.
And these towns: We destroyed them when they committed injustices, and We set for their destruction an appointed time.
And when Moses said to his young assistant, “I will not give up until I reach the junction of the two seas, even if I travel for ages.”
So when they reached the junction between them, they forgot about their fish. It made its way into the sea, slipping away.
When they went further, he said to his assistant, “Bring us our lunch; we were exposed in our travel to much fatigue.”
He said, “Do you remember when we rested by the rock? I forgot about the fish. None made me forget to mention this, except Satan. And so it made its way to the sea, amazingly.”
He said, “That is what we were looking for.” And so they turned back, retracing their footsteps.
Then they found a servant of Ours, whom We had blessed with mercy from Us, and had taught him knowledge from Our Own.
Moses said to him, “May I follow you, so that you may teach me some of the guidance you were taught?”
He said, “You will not be able to endure with me.
And how will you endure what you have no knowledge of?”
He said, “You will find me, Allah willing, patient; and I will disobey none of your orders.”
He said, “If you follow me, do not ask me about anything—until I clarify it for you.”
So they set out. Until, when they embarked on a boat, he made a hole in it. He said, “Did you make a hole in it, to drown its passengers? You have done something awful.”
He said, “Did I not say that you will be unable to endure with me?”
He said, “Do not rebuke me for forgetting, and do not make my course difficult for me.”
Then they set out. Until, when they came across a young boy, he killed him. He said, “Did you kill a pure soul, who killed no one? You have done something terrible.”
He said, “Did I not tell you that you will be unable to endure with me?”
He said, “If I ever question you about anything after this, then do not keep me in your company. You have received sufficient excuses from me.”
So they set out. Until, when they reached the inhabitants of a town, they asked them for food, but they refused to give them hospitality. There they found a wall about to collapse, and he repaired it. He said, “If you wanted, you could have obtained payment for it.”
He said, “This is the parting between you and me. I will inform you of the interpretation of what you could not endure.
As for the boat, it belonged to paupers working at sea. I intended to damage it because there was a king coming after them seizing every boat by force.
And as for the boy, his parents were believers, and we feared that he would overwhelm them with rebellion and disbelief.
So we wanted their Lord to replace him with someone better in integrity, and closer to kindness.
And as for the wall, it belonged to two orphan boys in the city. Beneath it was a treasure belonging to them. Their father was righteous. Your Lord wanted them to reach their maturity and then extract their treasure—as a mercy from your Lord. I did not do it of my own accord. This is the interpretation of what you could not bear patiently.”
And they ask you about Zul-Qarnain. Say, “I will tell you something about him.”
We established him in the land, and We gave him the means of everything.
So he pursued a course.
Until, when he reached the setting of the sun, he found it setting in a murky spring, and he found a people in its vicinity. We said, “O Zul-Qarnain: you may either inflict a penalty, or else treat them kindly.”
He said, “As for him who does wrong: we will penalize him, then he will be returned to his Lord, and He will punish him with an unheard-of torment.”
“But as for him who believes and acts righteously: for him is the finest reward, and We will issue easy commands for him.”
Then he pursued a course.
Until, when he reached the rising of the sun, he found it rising on a people for whom We had provided no shade from it.
So it was. And We had full knowledge of everything he had.
Then he pursued a course.
Until, when he reached between the two barriers, he found beside them a people who could hardly understand a word.
They said, “O Zul-Qarnain! Gog and Magog are spreading chaos throughout the land. Can we pay you, to build between us and them a wall?”
He said, “What my Lord has empowered me with is better. But assist me with manpower, and I will build between you and them a dam.”
“Bring me blocks of iron.” And when he had leveled the two cliffs, he said, “Blow.” And when he made it as fire, he said, “Bring me tar to pour over it.”
So they could not climb it, nor could they dig through it.
He said, “This is a mercy from my Lord. But when the promise of my Lord comes true, He will crumble it to dust. And my Lord’s promise is true.”
On that Day, We will leave them to surge over one another. And the Trumpet will be blown, and We will gather them together.
On that Day, We will present the unbelievers to Hell, all displayed.
Those whose eyes were veiled from My remembrance, and were unable to hear.
Do those who disbelieve think they can take My servants as lords instead of Me? We have prepared Gehenna for the hospitality of the faithless.
Say, “Shall we inform you about the worst losers' actions?”
“Those whose efforts in this world are misguided, while they assume that they are virtuous in their works.”
It is they who reject the communications of their Lord, and in the meeting with Him. So their works are in vain. And on the Day of Resurrection, We will consider them of no weight.
That is their payback: Hell. For having disbelieved, and for their taking My revelations and My messengers for a joke.
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds: they will have the Gardens of Paradise for hospitality.
Where they will be forever, desiring no change therefrom.
Say, “If the ocean were ink for the Words of my Lord, the ocean would run out, before the Words of my Lord run out,” even if We brought the like of it to replenish it.
Say, “I am only a human being like you, being inspired that your God is One God. Whoever hopes for the meeting with his Lord, let him work righteousness, and associate no one in the worship of his Lord.”
Kaf. Ha. Ya. Ayn. Saad.
A mention of the mercy of your Lord towards His servant Zechariah.
When he called on his Lord, a call in seclusion.
He said, “My Lord, my bones have become feeble, and my head is aflame with gray, and never, Lord, have I been disappointed in my prayer to you.
“And I fear for my relatives after me, and my wife is barren. So grant me, from Your Presence, an heir.
Who will inherit me and inherit from the House of Jacob. And make him, my Lord, pleasing.”
“O Zechariah, We give you good news of a boy, whose name is John; a name We have not given to anyone before.”
He said, “My Lord, how can I have a boy when my wife is barren, and I have become decrepit with old age?”
He said, “So will it be, your Lord says. ‘It is easy for Me. Just as I created you before when you were nothing!’”
He said, “My Lord, give me a sign.” He said, “Your sign is that you will not speak to the people for three nights straight.”
And he came out to his people, from the sanctuary, and signaled to them to praise morning and evening.
“O, John! Hold firmly to the Scripture!” And We gave him wisdom from childhood.
And sympathy from Us, and purity; and he was devout.
And kind to his parents; and he was not a disobedient bully.
And peace upon him the day he was born, and the day he dies, and the day he is raised alive.
And mention in the Scripture Mary, when she withdrew from her family to an eastern location.
She secluded herself from them, and We sent to her Our Spirit, and he appeared to her as an immaculate human.
She said, “I take protection from you in the Compassionate, should you be righteous.”
He said, “I am only the messenger of your Lord, to give you the gift of a pure boy.”
She said, “How can I have a son, when no man has touched me, and I was never unchaste?”
He said, “Thus said your Lord, `It is easy for Me, and We will make him a sign to humanity, and mercy from Us. It is a matter already decided.'”
So she conceived him, and withdrew with him to a remote place.
The labor-pains drove her to the trunk of the palm-tree. She said, “I wish I had died before this, and been completely forgotten.”
Whereupon he called her from beneath her: “Do not be sad; your Lord has placed a stream beneath you.
And shake towards you the trunk of the palm-tree; and fresh, ripe dates will fall on you.”
“So eat, and drink, and be cheerful. And if you see any human, say, ‘I have vowed a fast to the Most Gracious—so I will not speak to any human today.'”
Then she came to her people, carrying him. They said, “O Mary, you have done something terrible.
O sister of Aaron! Your father was not an indecent man, and your mother was not unchaste.”
So she pointed to him. They said, “How can we speak to an infant in the crib?”
He said, “I am the servant of Allah. He gave me the Scripture, and He made me a prophet.
And He made me a blessing wherever I may be, and has enjoined on me prayer and charity, so long as I live.
And kind to my mother, and He did not make me a disobedient rebel.
And Peace is upon me the day I was born, and the day I die, and the Day I get resurrected alive.”
That is Jesus son of Mary—the Word of Truth about which they doubt.
It is not for Allah to have a child—glory be to Him. When He decides on an issue, He says to it, “Be,” and it is.
“Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him. This is a straight path.”
But the various factions differed among themselves. So woe to those who disbelieve from the scene of a tremendous Day.
Listen to them, and watch for them, on the Day when they come to Us. But the wrongdoers today are completely lost.
And warn them of the Day of Regret, when the issue will be concluded. And they are in negligence, and they do not believe.
It is We who will inherit the earth and whatsoever is on it. And to Us, they will be returned.
And mention in the Book, Abraham. He was a man of truth, a prophet.
When He said to his father, “O my father, why do you worship what can neither hear, nor see, nor benefit you in any way?
O, my father! There has come to me knowledge that never came to you. So follow me, and I will guide you to a proper path.
O, my father! Do not worship Satan. Satan is disobedient to the Most Merciful.
O, my father! I fear that a punishment from the Compassionate will afflict you, and you become a friend of Satan.”
He said, “Are you renouncing my gods, O Abraham? If you do not desist, I will stone you. So leave me alone, for a long while.”
He said, “Peace be upon you. I will ask my Lord to forgive you; He has been gracious to me.
And I will distance myself from you, and from what you pray to besides Allah. And I will pray to my Lord, and I trust that I will not be disappointed in my prayer to my Lord.”
And when he withdrew from them, and from what they worship besides Allah, We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and each We made a prophet.
And We showered them with Our mercy, and We blessed them with an honorable reputation.
And mention in the Book Moses. He was chosen. He was a messenger, a prophet.
And We called him from the right side of the Mount, and We brought him in near communion.
And We appointed for him—from Our mercy—his brother Aaron, a prophet.
And mention in the Book Ishmael. He was true to his promise, and he was a messenger, a prophet.
And he used to urge his family to pray and to give charity, and he was pleasing to his Lord.
And mention in the Book Enoch. He was a man of truth, a prophet.
And We elevated him to a sublime station.
These are some of the prophets whom Allah has blessed, from the descendants of Adam, and from those We carried with Noah, and from the descendants of Abraham and Israel, and from those We guided and selected. Whenever the revelations of the Most Gracious were recited to them, they would fall down, prostrating and weeping.
But they were succeeded by generations who lost the prayers and followed their appetites. They will face perdition.
Except for those who repent, and believe, and act righteously. These will enter Paradise, and will not be wronged a bit.
The Gardens of Eden—promised by the Most Gracious to His worshipers in the Unseen. His promise will be fulfilled.
They will hear in it no-nonsense, but only peace. And they will have their provision in it, morning and evening.
That is Paradise which We will grant to those of Our servants who are devout.
“We do not descend, except by the command of your Lord. To Him belongs everything in front of us, everything behind us, and everything between that. And your Lord is not forgetful.”
Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them. So worship Him and persevere in His servitude. Do you know of anyone equal to Him?
And the human being says, “When I am dead, will I be brought to life?”
Does the human being not remember that We created him before—when he was nothing?
By your Lord, We will round them up, along with the devils, then We will bring them around Hell, on their knees.
Then, out of every sect, We will snatch those most defiant to the Compassionate.
Then We will know those most deserving to scorch in it.
There is not one of you but will approach it. It is, with your Lord, an unavoidable decision.
Then We will save those who were cautious, and leave the wrongdoers there, on their knees.
And when Our Verses are read to them, as clear proofs, those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “Which of the two groups is better in position, and in better company?”
How many generations have We destroyed before them, who surpassed them in assets and appearance?
Say, “Whoever is in error, the Most Gracious will lead him on.” Until, when they see what they were promised—either the punishment or the Hour. Then they will know whose position is worse, and whose forces are weaker.”
Allah increases in guidance those who are guided. And the things that last—the righteous deeds—have the best reward with your Lord, and the best outcome.
Have you considered him who denied Our revelations, and said, “I will be given wealth and children”?
Did he look into the future, or did he receive a promise from the Compassionate?
Not at all! We will record what he says, and We will keep extending the agony for him.
Then We will inherit from him what he says, and he will come to Us alone.
And they took, besides Allah, other gods, to be a source of strength for them.
By no means! They will reject their worship of them, and they will become opponents to them.
Do you not consider how We unleash the devils on the unbelievers, inciting them with incitement?
So be not in a hurry against them. We are counting for them a countdown.
On the Day when We will gather the righteous before the Beneficent, as guests.
And drive the guilty into Hell, as a thirsty herd.
They will have no power of intercession, except for someone who has a covenant with the Most Merciful.
And they say, “The Compassionate has taken a child.”
You have come up with something outrageous.
At which the heavens almost rupture, and the earth splits, and the mountains fall and crumble.
Because they attribute a child to the Most Merciful.
It is not fitting for the Most Gracious to have a child.
There is none in the heavens and the earth, but will come to the Beneficent, as a servant.
He has enumerated them, and He counted them one by one.
And every one of them will come to Him on the Day of Resurrection, alone.
Those who believe and do righteous deeds: the Mercy Giver will give them love.
We made it easy in your language: to deliver good news to the righteous, and to warn with it a hostile people.
How many a generation have We destroyed before them? Can you feel a single one of them, or hear from them a whisper?
Ta. Ha.
We did not reveal the Quran to you to make you suffer.
But only as a reminder for him who fears.
A revelation from He Who created the earth and the high heavens.
The Mercy-Giver; on the Throne He settled.
To Him belongs everything in the heavens, everything on earth, everything between them, and everything beneath the soil.
If you speak aloud—He knows the secret, and what is more hidden.
Allah—there is no god except He. He has the Most Beautiful Names.
Has the story of Moses reached you?
When he saw a fire, he said to his family, “Stay; I have noticed a fire; perhaps I can bring you a torch from it, or find guidance at the fire.”
Then, when he reached it, he was called: “O Moses!
I. I am your Lord. Take off your sandals. You are in the sacred valley of Tuwa.
And I have chosen you, so listen to what is revealed.
I. I am Allah. There is no God except Me. So serve Me, and practice the prayer for My remembrance.
The Hour is coming. But I keep it almost hidden, so that every soul is rewarded by what it endeavors.
And do not let him who denies it and follows his desire turn you away from it, or you will fall.
And what is that in your right hand, O Moses?”
He said, “It is my cane. I lean on it, and I herd my sheep with it, and I have other uses for it.”
He said, “Throw it, O Moses.”
So he threw it—and it was a serpent, moving swiftly.
He said, “Take hold of it, and do not fear. We will restore it to its original condition.
And press your hand to your side. It will come out white, without blemish—another sign.
So that We may show you some of Our greatest miracles.
Go to Pharaoh; he has transgressed.”
He said, “My Lord, put my heart at ease for me.
And ease my task for me.
And untie the knot from my tongue.
So that they can understand my speech.
And appoint an assistant for me, from my family.
Aaron, my brother.
And strengthen me with him.
And have him share in my mission.
So that we glorify You much.
And remember You much.
You are always watching over us.”
He said, “You are granted your request, O Moses.
And We have favored you another time.
When We inspired your mother with inspiration.
‘Put him in the chest, then throw it in the river. The river will wash him ashore, where an enemy of Mine and an enemy of his will pick him up.’ And I have bestowed on you love from Me, so that you would be raised under My eye.
When your sister walked along, and said, ‘Shall I direct you to someone who will take care of him?' So We returned you to your mother, so that she may be comforted, and not sorrow. And you killed a person, but We saved you from distress, and We tested you thoroughly. And you stayed for years among the people of Median. Then you came back, as destined, O Moses.
And I made you for Myself.
Go, you and your brother, with My proofs, and do not neglect My remembrance.
Go to Pharaoh. He has tyrannized.
But speak to him gently. Perhaps he will be mindful, or have some fear.”
They said, “Our Lord, we fear he may persecute us, or become violent.”
He said, “Do not fear, I am with you; I hear and I see.
Approach him, and say, `We are the messengers of your Lord, so let the Children of Israel go with us, and do not torment them. We have come to you with a message from your Lord, and peace is upon whoever follows the guidance.
It was revealed to us that punishment falls upon whoever rejects and turns away.'”
He said, “Who is your Lord, O Moses?”
He said, “Our Lord is He who gave everything its existence, then guided it.”
He said, “What about the first generations?”
He said, “Knowledge thereof is with my Lord in a Record. My Lord never errs, nor does He forget.”
He who made the earth a habitat for you, and traced in it pathways for you, and sent down rain from the sky, with which We produce pairs of diverse plants.
Eat and pasture your livestock. In this are signs for those possessed of sound judgment.
From it, We created you. And into it, We will return you. And from it, We will bring you out another time.
And We showed him Our miracles, all of them, but he denied and refused.
He said, “Did you come to us to expel us from our land with your magic, O Moses?
We will produce for you magic like it. So make an appointment between us and you, at a central place, which neither we nor you will fail to keep.”
He said, “Your appointment is on the Day of the Festival, so let the people assemble before noon.”
Pharaoh then withdrew, put together his plan, then came back.
Moses said to them, “Woe to you! Do not fabricate lies against Allah, or He will destroy you with a punishment. Whoever fabricates lies will be disappointed.”
So they disputed the matter among themselves, conversing privately.
They said, “These two are magicians who want to expel you from your land with their magic, and to abolish your exemplary way of life.
So settle your plan, and come as one front. Today, whoever gains the upper-hand will succeed.”
They said, “O Moses! Either you throw, or we will be the first to throw.”
He said, “No, you throw.” And suddenly, their ropes and their sticks appeared to him, because of their magic, to be crawling swiftly.
So Moses conceived a fear within himself.
We said, “Do not fear! You are the uppermost.
Now throw what is in your right hand, and it will swallow what they have crafted. What they have crafted is only a magician’s trickery. But the magician will not succeed, wheresoever he may go.”
And the magicians fell down in prostration. They said, “We have believed in the Lord of Aaron and Moses.”
He said, “Did you believe in him before I have given you permission? He must be your master, who taught you magic. I will cut off your hands and your feet on alternate sides, and I will crucify you on the trunks of the palm-trees. Then you will know whose punishment is more severe and more lasting.”
They said, “We will never prefer you over the proofs that have come to us, nor over He who originated us. So issue whatever judgment you wish to issue. You can rule only in this lowly life.
We have believed in our Lord, so that He may forgive us our sins, and the magic you compelled us to practice. Allah is better and more Lasting.”
Whoever comes to his Lord guilty, for him is Hell, where he neither dies nor lives.
But whoever comes to Him as a believer, having worked righteousness, theirs will be the highest ranks.
The Gardens of Eden, under which rivers flow, where they will stay forever. That is the reward for whoever purifies himself.
And We inspired Moses: “Travel by night with My worshipers, and strike for them a dry path through the sea, and do not fear being overtaken, and do not worry.”
Pharaoh pursued them with his troops, but the sea overwhelmed them, and completely engulfed them.
Pharaoh misled his people, and he did not guide them.
O Children of Israel! We saved you from your enemy, and We promised you by the right side of the Mount, and We sent down to you manna and quails.
Eat of the good things We have provided for you, but do not be excessive in it, lest My wrath descends upon you. He upon whom My wrath descends has fallen.
And I am Forgiving towards whoever repents, believes, acts righteously, and then remains guided.
“And what made you rush ahead of your people, O Moses?”
He said, “They are following in my footsteps. And I hurried on to You, my Lord, so that you may be pleased.”
He said, “We have tested your people in your absence, and the Samarian led them astray.”
So Moses returned to his people, angry and disappointed. He said, “O my people! Did your Lord not promise you a good promise? Was time too long for you? Or did you want wrath from your Lord to descend upon you, so you broke your promise to me?”
They said, “We did not break our promise to you by our choice, but we were made to carry loads of the people’s jewelry, and we cast them in. That was what the Samarian recommended.”
So he produced for them a calf—a body that lowed. And they said, “This is your god and the god of Moses, but he forgot.”
Have they not considered that it cannot return a word to them, and has no power to harm them or benefit them?
Aaron had told them beforehand, “O my people, you are being tested by this, and your Lord is the Beneficent. So follow me, and obey my command.”
They said, “We will not give up our devotion to it—until Moses returns to us.”
He said, “O Aaron, what prevented you—when you saw them going astray.
From following after me? Did you disobey my command?”
He said, “Son of my mother! Do not seize me by my beard or my head. I feared that you would say, `You have caused division between the Children of Israel, and did not observe my word.'”
He said, “What do you have to say, O Samarian?”
He said, “I saw what they did not see, so I grabbed a handful from the Messenger’s traces, and I flung it away. Thus my soul prompted me.”
He said, “Begone! Your lot in this life is to say, ‘No contact.’ And you have an appointment that you will not miss. Now, look at your god, to whom you remained devoted: we will burn it up, then scatter it in the sea, completely.”
Your God is Allah, the One besides whom there is no other god. He encompasses all things in knowledge.
Thus We narrate to you reports of times gone by. And We have given you a Reminder from Our Presence.
Whoever turns away from it will carry on the Day of Resurrection a burden.
Abiding in it forever. Evil is their burden on the Day of Resurrection.
On the Day when the Trumpet is blown—We will gather the criminals on that Day, blue.
Murmuring among themselves: “You have lingered only for ten.”
We are fully aware of what they say—when the most exemplary of them in conduct will say, “You have lingered only a day.”
And they ask you about the mountains. Say, “My Lord will pulverize them, utterly.
And reduce them into a desolate waste.
You will see in them neither dip nor elevation.”
On that Day, they will follow the Caller, without any deviation. Voices will be hushed before the Merciful, and you will hear nothing but murmur.
On that Day, mediation will be of no benefit, except for someone permitted by the Gracious, and whose words He has approved.
He knows what is ahead of them, and what is behind them, and they cannot encompass Him in their knowledge.
Faces will be humbled before the Living, the Eternal. Whoever carries injustice will despair.
But whoever has done righteous deeds, while being a believer—will fear neither wrong nor grievance.
Thus We revealed it an Arabic Quran, and We diversified the warnings in it, so perhaps they will become righteous, or it produces a lesson for them.
So Exalted is Allah, the True Sovereign. Do not be hasty with the Quran before its inspiration is concluded to you, and say, “My Lord, increase me in knowledge.”
And We covenanted with Adam before, but he forgot, and We found in him no resolve.
And when We said to the angels: “Prostrate yourselves before Adam.” They prostrated, except for Iblis—he refused.
We said, “O Adam, this is an enemy to you and to your wife. So let him not drive you out of Paradise, for then you will suffer.
In it, you will never go hungry, nor go naked.
Nor will you be thirsty in it, nor will you swelter.”
But Satan whispered to him. He said, “O Adam, shall I show you the Tree of Everlastingness and a kingdom that never decays?”
And so they ate from it, and their nakedness became exposed to them, and they began covering themselves with the leaves of the Garden. Adam disobeyed his Lord, and so became misled.
But then his Lord recalled him, pardoned him, and guided him.
He said, “Descend from it, all together, some of you enemies of others. But whenever guidance comes to you from Me, whoever follows My guidance, will neither go astray nor suffer.
But whoever turns away from My remembrance, for him is a confined life, and We will raise him on the Day of Resurrection blind.”
He will say, “My Lord, why did You raise me blind, although I was seeing?”
He will say, “Just as Our revelations came to you, and you forgot them, so today you will be forgotten.”
Thus We repay whoever transgresses and does not believe in the revelations of his Lord. The punishment of the Hereafter is more severe and more lasting.
Does it not serve as guidance for them, how many generations We destroyed before them, in whose settlements they walk? Surely in this are signs for those of sound judgment.
Were it not for a prior Word from your Lord, and an appointed term, it would have been necessary.
So bear patiently what they say, and celebrate your Lord’s praises before the rising of the sun, and before its setting, and during the hours of the night glorify Him, and at the borders of the day, so that you may be content.
And do not extend your glance towards what We have given some classes of them to enjoy—the flower of this life—so that We may test them thereby. But your Lord’s provision is better and more lasting.
And exhort your people to pray, and patiently adhere to it. We ask of you no sustenance, but it is We who sustain you. And the end belongs to reverence.
And they say, “If only he would bring us a miracle from his Lord.” Were they not given enough clear proofs in the former scriptures?
Had We destroyed them with a punishment before this, they would have said, “Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your revelations before being humiliated and disgraced.”
Say, “Everyone is waiting, so wait. You will know who the people of the sound path are, and who is guided.”
People’s reckoning has drawn near, but they turn away heedlessly.
No fresh reminder comes to them from their Lord, but they listen to it playfully.
Their hearts distracted, the wrongdoers discuss secretly, “Is he anything but a human like you? Will you yield to sorcery, while you see?”
He said, “My Lord knows whatever is spoken in heaven and on earth. And He is the Hearer, the Knower.”
And they said, “A jumble of dreams,” and, “He made it up,” and, “He is a poet,” “Let him bring us a miracle, like those sent to the ancients.”
None of the towns We destroyed before them had believed. Will they then believe?
We did not send before you except men, whom We inspired. Ask the people of knowledge, if you do not know.
We did not make them bodies that ate no food, nor were they immortal.
Then We fulfilled the promise to them, and We rescued them together with whomever We willed, and We destroyed the extravagant.
We revealed to you a Book containing your mention. Do you not reason?
How many a guilty town have We shattered, and We established thereafter another people?
And when they sensed Our Might, they started running away from it.
Do not run, but come back to your luxuries, and to your homes, so that you may be questioned.
They said, “Woe to us; we were wrongdoers.”
This continued to be their cry—until We made them silent ashes.
We did not create the sky, the earth, and everything between them in play.
If We wanted amusement, We could have found it in Our presence, were We to do so.
In fact, We hurl the Truth against falsehood, and it crushes it, so it vanishes. And woe to you, for what you describe.
To Him belongs everyone in the heavens and on earth. Those near Him are never too proud to worship Him, nor do they tire.
They praise night and day, without wavering.
Or have they taken gods from the earth, who resurrect?
If there were in them gods other than Allah, they would have gone to ruin. So glory be to Allah, Lord of the Throne, above what they describe.
He will not be questioned about what He does, but they will be questioned.
Or have they taken gods besides Him? Say, “Produce your proof. This is a Message for those with me, and a Message for those before me.” But most of them do not know the truth, so they turn away.
We sent no messenger before you, without inspiring him that: “There is no god except I, so worship Me.”
And they say, “The Mercy-Giver has taken a son.” Be He glorified; they are but honored servants.
They do not precede Him in speech, and they act according to His command.
He knows what is ahead of them, and what is behind them. And they cannot intercede, except for whom He approves. And they tremble in awe of Him.
And whoever of them says, “I am a god besides Him,” We will repay him with Hell. Thus We repay the wrongdoers.
Do the unbelievers not see that the heavens and the earth were joined together, and We split them apart? And We made from water every living thing. Will they not believe?
And We placed on earth stabilizers, lest it sways with them. And We placed on it signposts and passages, so that they may be guided.
And We made the sky a protected ceiling, yet they turn away from its wonders.
It is He who created the night and the day, and the sun and the moon—each gliding in an orbit.
We did not grant immortality to any human before you. Should you die, are they then the immortal?
Every soul will taste death. We burden you with bad and good—a test. And to Us, you will be returned.
And when those who disbelieve see you, they only make fun of you: “Is this the one who mentions your gods?” And they reject the mention of the Gracious.
The human being was created of rush. I will show you My signs, so do not seek to rush Me.
And they say, “When will this promise come true—if you are truthful?”
If those who disbelieve only knew, when they cannot keep the fire off their faces, and off their backs, and they will not be helped.
In fact, it will come upon them suddenly, and it will bewilder them. They will be unable to repel it, and they will not be delayed.
Messengers before you were ridiculed, but those who jeered became besieged by what they used to ridicule.
Say, “Who will protect you, by night and by day, from the Beneficent?” But they turn away from the remembrance of their Lord.
Or do they have gods who defend them against Us? They cannot help themselves, nor are they accompanied by Us.
We have given these enjoyments, and their ancestors—until life grew long for them. Do they not consider how We erode the land at its extremities? Is it they who will prevail?
Say, “I am warning you through inspiration.” But the deaf cannot hear the call when they are warned.
And when a breath of your Lord’s punishment touches them, they say, “Woe to us, we were wrongdoers.”
And We will set the scales of justice for the Day of Resurrection—so that no soul will suffer the least injustice. And even if it were the weight of a mustard seed, We will bring it. We are Sufficient as Reckoners.
And We gave Moses and Aaron the Criterion, and illumination, and a reminder for the righteous.
Those who fear their Lord in private, and are apprehensive of the Hour.
This too is a blessed message that We revealed. Are you going to deny it?
And We gave Abraham his sound judgment formerly, and We knew him well.
When he said to his father and his people, “What are these statues to which you are devoted?”
They said, “We found our forefathers worshiping them.”
He said, “You and your forefathers have obviously been astray.”
They said, “Did you come to us with the truth, or are you playing?”
He said, “Your Lord is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, He who originated them, and I bear witness to that.
“By Allah, I will have a plan for your statues, after you have gone away.”
So he reduced them into pieces, except for their biggest, so that they may return to it.
They said, “Who did this to our gods? He is a wrongdoer!”
They said, “We heard a young man mention them. He is called Abraham.”
They said, “Then bring him before the people’s eyes, so that they may witness.”
They said, “Was it you who did this to our gods, O Abraham?”
He said, “No, this one—the biggest of them—did it. Ask them, if they can speak.”
So they came back to their senses, and said, “You yourselves are the wrongdoers.”
But they reversed themselves: “You already know that these cannot speak.”
He said, “Do you worship, instead of Allah, what can neither benefit you nor harm you in anything?
Fie on you, and on whatever you worship below Allah. Do you not understand?”
They said, “Burn him and support your gods—if you are going to act.”
We said, “O fire, be coolness and safety for Abraham.”
And they intended to harm him, but We made them the worst losers.
And We saved him, along with Lot, to the land that We blessed for all people.
And We gave him Isaac, and in addition, Jacob, and We made all of them righteous.
And We made them leaders, guiding by Our command. And We inspired them to do good works, and to observe the prayer, and to give out charity. And they were worshippers of Us.
And Lot—We gave him wisdom and knowledge, and We saved him from the town that practiced the abominations. They were bad, perverted people.
And We admitted him into Our mercy. He was of the righteous.
And Noah, when he cried out before. So We answered him, and We saved him and his family from the great disaster.
And We made him prevail against the people who rejected Our signs. They were bad people, so We drowned them all.
And David and Solomon, when they gave judgment regarding the crops; when some people’s sheep strayed in it. And We were witnesses to their judgment.
And We gave Solomon an understanding of it. And to each, We gave wisdom and knowledge. And We subjected the mountains along with David to hymn Our praises—also the birds. We did this.
And We taught him the making of armor for you, to protect you from your violence. Will you be appreciative?
And for Solomon, the stormy wind, blowing by his command towards the land that We blessed. We know all things.
And of the devils were some that dived for him. And they performed other, lesser tasks. But We kept them restrained.
And Job, when he cried out to his Lord: “Great harm has afflicted me, and you are the Most Merciful of the merciful.”
So We answered him, and We removed the affliction that was upon him, and We restored his family to him—and their likes with them—mercy from Us, and a reminder to the servants.
And Ishmael, and Enoch, and Ezekiel—each was among the patient.
And We admitted them into Our mercy. They were of the righteous.
And Jonah, when he stormed out in a fury, thinking that We had no power over him. But then He cried out in the darkness: “There is no god but You! Glory be to You! I was of the wrongdoers!”
So We answered him, and We saved him from grief. Thus We save the believers.
And Zechariah, when he cried out to his Lord, “My Lord, do not leave me alone, although you are the Best of Inheritors.”
So We answered him, and We gave him John, and We cured his wife for him. They used to vie in righteous deeds. And they used to call on Us, in hope and awe. And they were humble before Us.
And she who guarded her virginity. We breathed into her from Our spirit, and We made her and her son a sign for the worlds.
This community of yours is one community, and I am your Lord, so serve Me.
But they splintered themselves into factions. Yet to Us, they will all return.
Whoever does righteous deeds, while he is a believer: his effort will not be denied. We are writing it down for him.
There is a ban on a town that We destroyed—they will not return.
Until, when Gog and Magog have broken loose, swarming down from every mound.
And the promise of truth has drawn near. The sights of those who disbelieved will stare in horror: “Woe to us. We were oblivious to this. In fact, we were wrongdoers.”
You and what you worship besides Allah are firewood for Hell. You will descend into it.
Had these been gods, they would not have descended into it. All will remain in it forever.
In it, they will wail. In it, they will not hear.
As for those who deserved good from Us—these will be kept away from it.
They will not hear its hissing, and they will delight in what their souls desire forever.
The Supreme Horror will not worry them, and the angels will receive them: “This is your day, which you were promised.”
On the Day when We fold the heaven, like the folding of a book. Just as We began the first creation, so We will repeat it—a promise binding on Us. We will do it.
And We wrote in the Psalms, after the Reminder, that the earth will be inherited by My righteous servants.
Surely in this is a notification for a worshiping people.
We did not send you except as a mercy for humankind.
Say, “It is inspired in me, that your God is One God. Are you going to submit?”
But if they turn away, then say, “I have warned you all equally. And I do not know whether what you are promised is near or far.”
He knows what is said openly, and He knows what you conceal.
“And I know not; perhaps it is a trial for you, and an enjoyment for a while.”
He said, “My Lord, judge with justice.” And, “Our Lord is the Gracious, Whose help is sought against what you describe.”
O, people! Be conscious of your Lord: the quaking of the Hour is something tremendous.
On the Day when you see it: every nursing mother will abandon what she nurses, and every pregnant female will abort her load. And you will see the people drunk, even though they are not drunk—but the punishment of Allah is severe.
And among the people are those who argue about Allah without knowledge, and follow every defiant devil.
It was decreed for him, that whoever follows him: he will misguide him, and lead him into the suffering of the Blaze.
O, people! If you are in doubt about the Resurrection: We created you from dust, then from a drop, then from a clinging clot, then from a lump—developed and undeveloped. To clarify things for you. And We settle in the wombs what We will, for a designated term, and then We bring you out as infants. Then you may reach your maturity. Some of you will pass away, and some of you will reach the vilest age, so that after having known he may not know. And you see the earth still, but when We send down water on it, it vibrates and swells, and grows every delightful pair.
That is because Allah is the Truth, and He gives life to the dead, and He is capable of everything.
And the Hour is coming, there is no doubt about it, and Allah will resurrect those in the graves.
And among the people are those who argue about Allah without knowledge, without guidance, and without an enlightening book.
Turning aside in contempt, to lead away from Allah’s path. For him is humiliation in this life; and on the Day of Resurrection, We will make him taste the agony of burning.
That is because of what your hands have advanced, and Allah is not unjust to the servants.
And among the people are some who worship Allah on edge. If something good befalls him, he is content with it. But if an ordeal strikes him, he makes a turnaround, losing this world and the next. That is the obvious loss.
He calls, apart from Allah, upon what neither harms him nor benefits him. That is the far straying.
He calls upon one whose harm is closer than his benefit. What a miserable master, and what an evil companion.
Allah will admit those who believe and do righteous deeds into Gardens beneath which rivers flow. Allah does whatever He wills.
Whoever thinks that Allah will not help him in this life and in the Hereafter: let him stretch to the sky, then sever, then see if his cunning eliminates what enrages.
And so We revealed it as Clear Verses, and Allah guides whomever He wills.
Those who believe, and those who are Jewish, and the Sabeans, and the Christians, and the Zoroastrians, and the Associators—Allah will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection. Allah is Witness over everything.
Do you not realize that to Allah prostrates everyone in the heavens and everyone on earth, and the sun, and the moon, and the stars, and the mountains, and the trees, and the animals, and many of the people? But many are justly deserving of punishment. Whomever Allah shames, there is none to honor him. Allah does whatever He wills.
Here are two adversaries feuding about their Lord. As for those who disbelieve: garments of fire will be tailored for them, and boiling water will be poured over their heads.
Melting their insides, and their skins.
And they will have maces of iron.
Every time they try to escape the gloom, they will be returned into it: “Taste the suffering of burning!”
But Allah will admit those who believe and do good deeds into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, where they will be adorned with bracelets of gold and pearls—and their clothing will be of silk.
They were guided to the purity of speech. They were guided to the path of the Praised.
As for those who disbelieve and repel from Allah’s path and from the Sacred House—which We have appointed for all people, residents and visitors alike. Whoever seeks to commit sacrilege in it: We will make him taste of a painful punishment.
And We showed Abraham the location of the House: “Do not associate anything with Me. And purify My House for those who go around, and those who stand, and those who bow and prostrate.”
And call the people to the pilgrimage. They will come to you on foot, and on every transport. They will come from every distant point.
So that they may witness benefits for them, and celebrate Allah’s Name during the appointed days—for providing them with the livestock animals. So eat from it, and feed the suffering poor.
Then let them perform their acts of purification, and fulfill their pledges, and circle the Ancient House.
Thus it is. Whoever magnifies the sanctities of Allah—It is better for him in the sight of their Lord. Livestock is permitted to you, except what was recited to you. So shun the abomination of idols, and shun false speech.
Being faithful to Allah, not associating with Him. Whoever ascribes partners to Allah—it is as though he has fallen from the sky, and is snatched by the birds, or is swept away by the wind to a distant abyss.
So it is. Whoever magnifies the sacraments of Allah—it is from the reverence of the hearts.
In them are benefits for you, until a specified time. Then their place is at the Ancient House.
For every community, We have appointed a rite, so that they may pronounce Allah’s Name over the livestock He has provided them. Your God is One God, so to Him submit, and give good news to the humble.
Those whose hearts tremble when Allah is mentioned, and those who endure what has befallen them, and those who perform the prayer and spend from what We have provided for them.
And We made animal offerings among Allah’s rituals for you. There is good for you in them. So pronounce Allah’s Name over them when they line up. Then, when they have fallen on their sides: eat of them, and feed the needy who solicit and those who do not. Thus We subjected them to you, so you may give thanks.
Neither their flesh nor their blood ever reaches Allah. What reaches Him is the reverence from you. Thus He subdued them to you, so that you may glorify Allah for having guided you. And give good news to the charitable.
Allah defends those who believe. Allah does not love any ungrateful traitor.
Permission is granted to those who are fought—because they were wronged. And Allah is able to give them victory.
Those who were unjustly evicted from their homes, only for saying: “Our Lord is Allah.” Were it not for Allah’s repelling people, some by means of others, monasteries, churches, synagogues, and mosques, where Allah’s Name is commemorated much, would have been demolished. Allah supports those who stand up for Him. Allah is Strong, Honorable.
Those who, when We establish them in the land, perform the prayer, and give regular charity, and command what is right, and forbid what is wrong. With Allah rests the outcome of events.
And if they deny you—the people of Noah denied before them, as did Aad and Thamood.
And the people of Abraham, and the people of Lot.
And the residents of Median. And Moses was called a liar. Then I indulged the unbelievers. Then I seized them. So how was My rejection?
How many a town have We destroyed while it did wrong? It has fallen in ruin, with stilled wells, and lofty mansions.
Have they not journeyed through the earth, and had hearts to reason with, or ears to listen with? It is not the eyes that go blind, but it is the hearts, within the chests, that go blind.
And they challenge you to hurry up the punishment. And Allah will never break His promise. But a day with your Lord is as a thousand years of your count.
How many a town did I indulge, while it was unjust? Then I seized it. To Me is the destination.
Say, “O people, I am a clear warner to you.”
Those who believe and work righteousness: for them is forgiveness and a generous provision.
But those who strive to discredit Our revelations: these are the inmates of the Blaze.
We never sent a messenger before you, or a prophet, but when he desired, Satan interfered in his wishes. But Allah nullifies what Satan interjects, then Allah affirms His revelations. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
To make Satan’s suggestions a trial for those whose hearts are diseased, and those whose hearts are hardened. The wrongdoers are in deep discord.
So that those gifted with knowledge would know that it is the truth from your Lord, and thus believe in it, and so that their hearts soften to it. Allah guides those who believe to a straight path.
Those who disbelieve will remain in doubt about it—until the Hour takes them by surprise, or there comes upon them the suffering of a desolate day.
The authority on that Day will be Allah’s. He will judge between them. Those who believe and do good works will be in the Gardens of Delight.
But as for those who disbelieve and reject Our revelations, for them will be a humiliating punishment.
Those who emigrate in Allah’s way, and then get killed, or die, Allah will grant them a good provision. Allah is the Best of Providers.
He will admit them an admittance they will be pleased with. Allah is Knowing and Clement.
Thus it is. Whoever retaliates in equivalence to the injury he received, but then he is wronged again, Allah will assist him. Allah is Pardoning and Forgiving.
That is because Allah merges the night into the day, and merges the day into the night, and because Allah is Hearing and Seeing.
That is because Allah is the Reality, and what they call upon besides Him is vanity, and because Allah is the Sublime, the Grand.
Do you not see that Allah sends down water from the sky, and the land becomes green? Allah is Kind and Aware.
To Him belongs whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth. Allah is the Rich, the Praised.
Do you not see that Allah has subjected to you whatever is on earth? And the ships sailing through the sea by His command? And He keeps the sky from falling down on earth, except by His permission. Allah is Gentle towards the people, Most Merciful.
It is He who gave you life, then makes you die, then revives you. The human being is ever ungrateful.
For every community, We have appointed rites that they fulfill. So let them not dispute with you over the matter. And invite to your Lord. You are on Straight Guidance.
And if they argue with you, say, “Allah fully knows what you do.”
Allah will judge between you on the Day of Resurrection concerning what you used to differ about.
Do you not know that Allah knows everything in the heavens and on earth? This is in a Record. That is easy for Allah.
Yet they worship, besides Allah, what He never authorized, and of which they have no knowledge. There is no helper for the wrongdoers.
And when Our Clear Verses are read to them, you will recognize denial on the faces of those who disbelieve, as they nearly assault those who read Our revelations to them. Say, “Shall I inform you of something far worse than that? The Fire! Allah has promised it to those who disbelieve. What a miserable outcome!”
O, people! A parable is presented, so listen to it: those you call upon besides Allah will never create a fly, even if they came together for that purpose. And if the fly snatches anything from them, they cannot recover it from it. Weak is the pursuer and the pursued.
They do not appreciate Allah as He should be appreciated. Allah is Strong, Mighty.
Allah selects messengers from among the angels, and from among the people. Allah is Hearing and Seeing.
He knows what is ahead of them, and what is behind them. And to Allah, all matters will be returned.
O you who believe! Bow down, and prostrate, and worship your Lord, and do good deeds, so that you may succeed.
And strive for Allah, with the striving due to Him. He has chosen you, and He has not burdened you in religion—the way of your father Abraham. It is he who named you Muslims before, and in this. So that the Messenger may be a witness over you, and you may be witnesses over the people. So pray regularly, and give regular charity, and adhere to Allah. He is your Guardian. What an excellent Master, and what an excellent Helper.
The believers have succeeded.
Those who are humble in their prayers.
Those who avoid nonsense.
Those who work for charity.
Those who safeguard their chastity.
Except from their spouses, or their dependents—then they are free from blame.
But whoever seeks anything beyond that—these are the transgressors.
And those who are faithful to their trusts and pledges.
And those who safeguard their prayers.
These are the inheritors.
Who will inherit Paradise, remaining in it forever.
We created the human being from an extract of clay.
Then We made him a drop, in a secure repository.
Then We developed the drop into a clinging clot. Then We developed the clot into a lump. Then We developed the lump into bones. Then We clothed the bones with flesh. Then We produced it into another creature. Most Blessed is Allah, the Best of Creators!
Then, after that, you will die.
Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will be resurrected.
And We created above you seven pathways, and We are never neglectful of creation.
And We sent down from the sky water in proper quantity, and We settled it in the ground, and We are able to take it away.
With it, We produce for you gardens of date-palms and grapes, yielding abundant fruit, from which you eat.
And a tree issuing from Mount Sinai, producing oil, and seasoning for those who eat.
And there is a lesson for you in livestock: We give you to drink from what is in their bellies. And in them, you have many uses. And some of them you eat.
And on them, and on ships, you are transported.
We sent Noah to his people. He said, “O my people, worship Allah, you have no god other than Him. Will you not be reverent?”
But the notables among his people, who disbelieved, said, “This is only a human like you, aspiring to gain dominance over you. Had Allah willed, He would have sent down angels. We never heard of this from our forefathers of old.
He is nothing but a man possessed. Just ignore him for a while.”
He said, “My Lord, help me, for they have rejected me.”
So We inspired him: “Build the Ark under Our observation and by Our inspiration. Then, when Our command arrives, and the oven overflows, load into it a pair of every kind, along with your family, except those against whom the word has already been pronounced. And do not address me concerning those who did wrong; they are to be drowned.”
Then, when you and those with you are settled in the Ark, say, “Praise be to Allah, who has saved us from the wrongdoing people.”
And say, “My Lord, land me a blessed landing, for you are the best of transporters.”
Surely in this are lessons. We are always testing.
Then, after them, We established another generation.
And We sent among them a messenger, from among themselves: “Worship Allah! You have no god other than Him. Will you not be cautious?”
But the dignitaries among his people, those who disbelieved and denied the meeting of the Hereafter, and We had indulged them in the present life, said, “This is nothing but a human like you; he eats what you eat, and he drinks what you drink.
If you obey a human being like yourselves, you will be losers.
Does he promise you that when you are dead and reduced to dust and bones, you will be brought out?
Farfetched, farfetched is what you are promised.
There is nothing except our worldly life: we die, and we live, and we will not be resurrected.
He is nothing but a man, making up lies about Allah. We have no faith in him.”
He said, “My Lord, help me, for they have rejected me.”
He said, “Soon they will be filled with regret.”
And the Blast struck them, justifiably, and We turned them into scum. So away with the wicked people.
Then, after them, We raised other generations.
No nation can advance its time, nor can they postpone it.
Then We sent Our messengers in succession. Whenever a messenger came to his community, they called him a liar. So We made them follow one another, and We made them history. So away with a people who refuse to believe.
Then We sent Moses and his brother Aaron, with Our signs and compelling proof.
To Pharaoh and his inner circle, but they turned arrogant, and were tyrannical people.
They said, “Are we to believe in two humans like ourselves, while their people are our slaves?”
So they rejected them both—thus they became of the destroyed.
And We gave Moses the Scripture, so they may be guided.
And We made Mary’s son and his mother a sign, and We sheltered them on a  hilltop with security and flowing springs.
O, messengers! Eat of the good things and act with integrity. I am aware of what you do.
This nation of yours is one nation, and I am your Lord, so reverence Me.
But they tore themselves into sects. Each faction is happy with what they have.
So leave them in their bewilderment until a time.
Do they assume that, in furnishing them with wealth and children.
Do We race to give them the good things? In fact, they have no idea.
Those who are in awe for fear of their Lord.
And those who believe in the Verses of their Lord.
And those who ascribe no partners to their Lord.
And those who give what they give, while their hearts tremble, knowing that to their Lord they will return.
It is they who race towards good deeds, and they will reach them first.
We burden no soul beyond its capacity. And with Us is a book that speaks in truth, and they will not be treated unjustly.
But their hearts are oblivious to this. And they have deeds that do not conform to this, which they continue to perpetrate.
Until, when We seize their elite with torment, they begin to groan.
Do not groan today. You will receive no help from Us.
My revelations were recited to you, but you turned away from them.
Arrogant towards them—talked nonsense about them—disregarded them.
Have they not pondered the Word? Or did something come to them that did not come to their forefathers?
Or is it that they do not recognize their Messenger, so they are denying him?
Or do they say, “He is possessed?” In fact, he brought them the truth, but most of them hate the truth.
If the truth conformed to their desires: the heavens, the earth, and everyone in them would have been corrupted. In fact, We gave them their Reminder, but they are avoiding their Reminder.
Or are you asking them for payment? The revenue from your Lord is better, and He is the Best of providers.
You are inviting them to a straight path.
But those who do not believe in the Hereafter are swerving from the path.
And even if We had mercy on them, and relieved their problems, they would blindly persist in their defiance.
We had already gripped them with suffering, but they did not yield to their Lord, nor did they humble themselves.
Until, when We open for them a gate of intense agony, at once they will despair.
It is He who produced for you the hearing, and the eyesight, and the feelings. But little gratitude you show.
And it is He who multiplied you on earth. And to Him, you will be gathered.
And it is He Who gives life and causes death, and to Him is the alternation of night and day. Do you not understand?
But they say the like of what the ancients said.
They say, “After we have died, and become dust and bones, are we to be resurrected?
We were promised this before—us and our ancestors—these are nothing but legends of the ancients.”
Say, “To whom belongs the earth, and everyone in it, if you happen to know?”
They will say, “To Allah.” Say, “Will you not reflect?”
Say, “Who is the Lord of the seven heavens, and the Lord of the Splendid Throne?”
They will say, “To Allah.” Say, “Will you not be righteous?”
Say, “In Whose Hand is the dominion of all things, and He protects and cannot be protected from—if you happen to know?”
They will say, “To Allah.” Say, “Then are you bewitched?”
In fact, We have given them the truth, and they are liars.
Allah has never begotten a son, nor is there any god besides Him. Otherwise, each god would have taken away what it created, and some of them would have gained supremacy over others. Glorified is Allah, far beyond what they describe.
The Knower of the hidden and the apparent. Exalted is He above what they associate.
Say, “My Lord, if You would show me what they are promised.
My Lord, do not place me among the wrongdoing people.”
And We are able to show you what We promise them.
Repel evil with what is better. We are aware of what they describe.
And say, “My Lord, I seek refuge in You from the urgings of the devils.
And I seek refuge in You, my Lord, lest they become present.”
Until, when death approaches one of them, he says, “My Lord, send me back.
So that I may work righteousness in what I neglected.” By no means! It is just a word that he utters. And behind them is a barrier, until the Day they are resurrected.
And when the Trumpet is blown: there will be no relations between them on that Day, nor will they ask after one another.
As for those whose scales are heavy—these are the successful.
But as for those whose scales are light—it is they who have lost their souls—in Gehenna, they will remain forever.
The Fire lashes their faces, leaving them deformed.
“Were not My Verses recited to you, and you kept on rejecting them?”
They will say, “Our Lord, our wretchedness has prevailed over us, and we were a misguided people.
Our Lord! Get us out of this! If we ever returned, we would be wrongdoers.”
He will say, “Be despised in there, and do not speak to Me.
There was a group of My servants who used to say, `Our Lord, we have believed, so forgive us, and have mercy on us; You are the Best of the merciful.’
But you made them a target of ridicule—until they made you forget My remembrance. And you used to laugh at them.
Today, I have rewarded them for their endurance—they are the triumphant.”
He will say, “How many years did you remain on earth?”
They will say, “We remained a day, or part of a day. But ask those who keep count.”
He will say, “You remained only for a little while—if you only knew.
Did you think that We created you in vain, and that to Us you will not be returned?”
So Exalted is Allah, the True Sovereign. There is no deity except Him, Lord of the Noble Throne.
Whoever calls upon another god with Allah—he has no proof thereof—his reckoning rests with his Lord. The disbelievers will not succeed.
And say, “My Lord, forgive and have mercy, and You are the Best of the merciful.”
A chapter that We revealed, and made obligatory, and revealed in it Clear Verses, so that you may take notice.
The adulteress and the adulterer: whip each one of them a hundred lashes. And let no pity towards them overcome you regarding Allah’s Law—if you believe in Allah and the Last Day. And let their punishment be witnessed by a group of believers.
The adulterer shall marry none but an adulteress or an idolatress. And the adulteress shall marry none but an adulterer or an idolater. That is prohibited for believers.
As for those who accuse chaste women, and do not produce four witnesses, whip them eighty lashes. And never accept any testimony from them—these are the immoral.
Except those who repent afterward and reform—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
As for those who accuse their own wives, but have no witnesses except themselves, the testimony of one of them is equivalent to four testimonies, if he swears by Allah that he is truthful.
And the fifth time: that Allah’s curse be upon him: if he is a liar.
But the punishment shall be averted from her, if she swears four times by Allah, that he is a liar.
And the fifth time: that Allah’s wrath be upon her: if he is truthful.
Were it not for Allah’s favor upon you, and His mercy, and that Allah is Acceptor of repentance and Wise.
Those who perpetrated the slander were a bunch of you. Do not consider it bad for you, but it is good for you. Each person among them bears his share in the sin. As for him who played the major role: for him is a terrible punishment.
If only, when you heard it, the believing men and believing women thought well of one another, and said, “This is an obvious lie.”
Why did they not produce four witnesses? If they do not produce the witnesses, then in Allah’s sight, they are liars.
Were it not for Allah’s grace upon you, and His mercy, in this world and the Hereafter, you would have suffered a great punishment for what you ventured into.
When you passed it from one tongue to another, and you said with your mouths what you had no knowledge of, and you considered it trivial, but according to Allah, it is very serious.
If only, upon hearing it, you said, “It is not for us to repeat this. Glory be to You, this is a heinous slander.”
Allah cautions you never to return to the like of it—if you are believers.
Allah explains the Revelations to you. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
Those who love to see immorality spread among the believers—for them is a painful punishment, in this life and in the Hereafter. And Allah knows, and you do not know.
Were it not for Allah’s grace upon you, and His mercy, and that Allah is Clement and Merciful.
O you who believe! Do not follow the footsteps of Satan. Whoever follows Satan’s footsteps—he advocates indecency and wickedness. Were it not for Allah’s favor towards you, and His mercy, none of you would be pure, ever. But Allah purifies whom He wills. Allah is All-Hearing, All-Knowing.
Those among you who possess affluence and means should not refuse to give to the relatives, and the needy, and the emigrants in Allah’s way. And let them pardon. And let them overlook. Do you not love for Allah to forgive you? Allah is Pardoning and Merciful.
Those who slander honorable, innocent, believing women are cursed in this life and in the Hereafter. And they will have a terrible punishment.
On the Day when their tongues, and their hands, and their feet will testify against them regarding what they used to do.
On that Day, Allah will pay them their just due in full, and they will know that Allah is the Evident Reality.
Wicked women are for wicked men, and wicked men are for wicked women, and good women are for good men, and good men are for good women. These are acquitted of what they say. They will have forgiveness and a generous provision.
O you who believe! Do not enter houses other than your own, until you have asked for permission, and greeted their occupants. That is better for you; so that you may remember.
And if you find no one in them, do not enter them until you are given permission. And if it is said to you, “Turn back,” then turn back. That is more proper for you. Allah is aware of what you do.
There is no blame on you for entering public places, in which is something of benefit for you. Allah knows what you disclose and what you conceal.
Tell the believing men to restrain their looks, and to guard their privates. That is purer for them. Allah is Aware of what they do.
And tell the believing women to restrain their looks, and to guard their privates, and not display their beauty except what is apparent thereof, and to draw their coverings over their breasts, and not expose their beauty except to their husbands, their fathers, their husbands' fathers, their sons, their husbands' sons, their brothers, their brothers' sons, their sisters' sons, their fellow women, what their right hands possess, their male attendants who have no sexual desires, or children who are unaware of women’s nudity. And they should not strike their feet, drawing attention to their hidden beauty. And turn to Allah in repentance, all together, O believers, so that you may be successful.
And wed those who are single among you. And those who are fit among your servants and maids. If they are poor, Allah will enrich them from His bounty. Allah is All-Encompassing, All-Knowing.
And let those who cannot marry abstain, until Allah enriches them from His bounty. If any of your servants wish to be freed, grant them their wish, if you recognize goodness in them. And give them of Allah’s wealth, which he has given you. And do not compel your girls to prostitution, seeking the materials of this life, while they desire to remain chaste. Should anyone compel them—then after their compulsion, Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
We revealed to you clarifying revelations, along with examples of those who passed on before you, and advice for the righteous.
Allah is the Light of the heavens and the earth. The parable of His light is that of a niche, in which is a lamp. The lamp is within a crystal. The crystal is like a brilliant planet, fueled by a blessed tree, an olive tree, neither eastern nor western. Its oil would almost illuminate, even if no fire has touched it. Light upon Light. Allah guides to His light whom He wills. And Allah presents the parables to the people. And Allah knows everything.
In houses that Allah has permitted to be raised, and His name is celebrated there. He is glorified there, morning and evening.
By men who neither trade nor commerce distracts them from the remembrance of Allah, and from performing the prayers, and from giving charity. They fear a Day when hearts and sights are overturned.
So that Allah may reward them according to the best of what they did, and increase them from His bounty. Allah provides for whom He wills without measure.
As for those who disbelieve: their works are like a mirage in a desert. The thirsty imagines it as water. Until, when he has reached it, he finds it to be nothing, and he finds Allah with him, Who settles his account in full. Allah is quick in accounting.
Or like utter darkness in a vast ocean, covered by waves, above which are waves, above which is fog—darknesses, one above the other. If he brings out his hand, he can hardly see it. He to whom Allah has not granted a light has no light.
Do you not realize that Allah is glorified by whoever is in the heavens and on earth, even by the birds in formation? Each knows its manner of prayer and praise. Allah knows what they do.
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, and to Allah is the final return.
Do you not see how Allah propels the clouds, then He joins them together, then He piles them into a heap, and you see raindrops pouring from its midst? How He brings down from the sky loads of hail, striking with it whom He wills, and averting it from whom He wills? The flash of its lightning nearly snatches the sight away.
Allah alternates the night and the day. Surely in this is a lesson for people of insight.
And Allah created every living creature from water. Some of them crawl on their bellies, and some walk on two legs, and some walk on four. Allah creates whatever He wills. Allah is Capable of everything.
We sent down enlightening revelations, and Allah guides whom He wills to a straight path.
And they say, “We have believed in Allah and in the Messenger, and we obey.” Then some of them turn away thereafter. These are not believers.
And when they are invited to Allah and His Messenger, to judge between them, some of them suddenly turn away.
But if justice is on their side, they accept it willingly.
Is there a sickness in their hearts? Or are they suspicious? Or do they fear that Allah may do them an injustice? Or His Messenger? In fact, they themselves are the unjust.
The only response of the believers, when they are invited to Allah and His Messenger, to judge between them, is to say, “We hear and we obey.” It is they who are the achievers.
Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger, and fears Allah and is conscious of Him—these are the winners.
And they swear by Allah with their most solemn oaths: if you were to command them, they would mobilize. Say, “Do not swear; obedience will be recognized; Allah is experienced with what you do.”
Say, “Obey Allah and obey the Messenger.” But if they turn away, then he is responsible for his obligations, and you are responsible for your obligations. But if you obey him, you will be guided. It is only incumbent on the Messenger to deliver the Message clearly.
Allah has promised those among you who believe and do good deeds, that He will make them successors on earth, as He made those before them successors, and He will strengthen their religion for them—which He has approved for them—and He will substitute security in place of their fear. They worship Me, associating nothing with Me. But whoever disbelieves thereafter—these are the rebellious.
And pray regularly, and give charity regularly, and obey the Messenger, so that you may receive mercy.
Never think that those who disbelieve can escape on earth. Their housing is the Fire: a miserable destination.
O you who believe! Permission must be requested by your servants and those of you who have not reached puberty. On three occasions: before the Dawn Prayer, and at noon when you change your clothes, and after the Evening Prayer. These are three occasions of privacy for you. At other times, it is not wrong for you or them to intermingle with one another. Allah thus clarifies the revelations for you. Allah is Aware and Wise.
When the children among you reach puberty, they must ask permission, as those before them asked permission. Allah thus clarifies His revelations for you. Allah is Knowledgeable and Wise.
Women past the age of childbearing, who have no desire for marriage, commit no wrong by taking off their outer clothing, provided they do not flaunt their charm. But to maintain modesty is better for them. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
There is no blame on the blind, nor any blame on the disabled, nor any blame on the sick, nor on yourselves for eating at your homes, or your fathers’ homes, or your mothers’ homes, or your brothers’ homes, or your sisters’ homes, or the homes of your paternal uncles, or the homes of your paternal aunts, or the homes of your maternal uncles, or the homes of your maternal aunts, or those in your trust, or your friend’s. You commit no wrong by eating together or separately. But when you enter any home, greet one another with a greeting from Allah, blessed and good. Thus Allah explains the revelations for you, so that you may understand.
The believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger, and when they are with him for a matter of common interest, they do not leave until they have asked him for permission. Those who ask your permission are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger. So when they ask your permission to attend to some affair of theirs, give permission to any of them you wish, and ask Allah to forgive them. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Do not address the Messenger, in the same manner, you address one another. Allah knows those of you who slip away using flimsy excuses. So let those who oppose his orders beware, lest an ordeal strikes them, or a painful punishment befalls them.
Know that to Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. He knows what you stand for. And on the day they are returned to Him, He will inform them of what they did. Allah has full knowledge of all things.
Blessed is He who sent down the Criterion to His servant, that he may be a warner to humanity.
He to whom belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth, who took to Himself no son, who never had a partner in His sovereignty, who created everything and determined its measure.
And yet, instead of Him, they produce for themselves gods that create nothing, but are themselves created; that have no power to harm or benefit them; that have no control over death, or life, or resurrection.
Those who disbelieve say, “This is nothing but a lie he fabricated, and others have helped him at it.” They have committed injustice and perjury.
And they say, “Legends of the ancients; he wrote them down; they are dictated to him morning and evening.”
Say, “It was revealed by He who knows the secret in the heavens and the earth. He is always Forgiving and Merciful.”
And they say, “What sort of a messenger is this, who eats food, and walks in the marketplaces? If only an angel was sent down with him, to be alongside him a warner.”
Or, “If only a treasure was dropped on him.” Or, “If only he had a garden from which he eats.” The unjust also say, “You are only following a man under a spell.”
Look how they invent examples for you. They have gone astray, and cannot find a way.
Blessed is He, who, if He wills, can give you better than that: gardens beneath which rivers flow, and He will give you palaces.
But they deny the Hour, and We have prepared for those who deny the Hour a Blaze.
When it sees them from a distant place, they will hear it raging and roaring.
And when they are thrown into it, into a narrow place, shackled, they will plead there for death.
“Do not plead for one death today, but plead for a great many deaths.”
Say, “Is this better, or the Garden of Eternity promised to the cautious?” It is for them a reward and a destination.
They will have there whatever they desire, forever. This is upon your Lord a binding promise.
On the Day when He gathers them, along with what they worshiped besides Allah, He will say, “Was it you who misled these servants of Mine, or was it they who lost the way?”
They will say, “Glory be to You. It was not for us to take any lords besides You. But you gave them enjoyments, and their ancestors, until they forgot the Remembrance and became ruined people.”
They have denied you because of what you say; so you can neither avert, nor help. Whoever among you commits injustice, We will make him taste a horrible punishment.
We sent no messengers before you, but they ate food and walked in the marketplaces. And We made some of you a trial for one another—will you be patient? Your Lord is always Observing.
Those who do not expect to meet Us, say, “If only the angels were sent down to us, or we could see our Lord.” They have grown proud within themselves, and they have become excessively defiant.
On the Day when they see the angels—there will be no good news for the guilty on that Day; and they will say, “A forbidden ban!”
And We will proceed to their deeds, and We will reduce them to scattered dust.
The inhabitants of Paradise on that Day will be better lodged, and most beautifully accommodated.
On the Day when the sky will burst with clouds, and the angels are sent down in streams.
On that Day, true sovereignty will belong to the Compassionate. And that will be a difficult Day for the unbelievers.
On that Day, the wrongdoer will bite his hands, and say, “If only I had followed a way with the Messenger.
Woe to me; I wish I never took so-and-so for a friend.
He led me away from the Message after it came to me, and Satan has always been a betrayer of man.”
And the Messenger will say, “My Lord, my people have abandoned this Quran.”
Likewise, to every prophet We assign enemies from among the guilty. But your Lord suffices as a Guide and Helper.
Those who disbelieve say, “Why was the Quran not revealed to him at once?” Thus to strengthen your heart with it, and We revealed it in stages.
Whatever argument they come to you with, We provide you with the truth, and a better explanation.
Those who are herded into Hell on their faces—these are in a worse position, and further astray from the way.
We gave Moses the Scripture, and We appointed his brother Aaron as a helper.
We said, “Go to the people who rejected Our signs.” Then We destroyed them completely.
And the people of Noah: when they rejected the messengers, We drowned them, and We made them a lesson for humanity. And We have prepared for the wrongdoers a painful punishment.
And Aad, and Thamood, and the inhabitants of Arras, and many generations in between.
To each, We presented the parables, and each We devastated utterly.
And they came upon the town that was drenched by the terrible rain. Did they not see it? But they do not hope for resurrection.
And when they see you, they take you for nothing but a joke: “Is this the one Allah sent as a messenger?”
“He almost led us away from our gods, had we not adhered to them.” But they will know, when they see the suffering, who is further away from the way.
Have you considered him who took his desire as his god? Would you be an agent for him?
Or do you assume that most of them hear or understand? They are just like cattle, but even more errant in their way.
Do you not see how your Lord extends the shade? Had He willed, He could have made it stationary. And We made the sun a pointer to it.
Then We withdraw it towards Us, a gentle withdrawal.
And it is He who made the night a covering for you—and sleep for rest. And He made the day a revival.
And it is He who sends the winds, ushering His mercy; and We send down from the sky pure water.
To revive dead lands thereby, and to provide drink for the multitude of animals and humans We created.
We have circulated it among them, so that they may reflect, but most people persist in thanklessness.
Had We willed, We could have sent a warner to every town.
So do not obey the unbelievers, but strive against them with it, a grand struggle.
And it is He who merged the two seas: this one sweet and drinkable, and the other salty and bitter. And He placed between them a barrier and an impassable boundary.
And it is He who created the human being from a fluid, and made of him relationships through marriage and mating. Your Lord has always been Capable.
And yet, instead of Allah, they serve what can neither benefit them nor harm them. The unbeliever has always turned his back on his Lord.
We sent you only as a deliverer of good news and a warner.
Say, “I ask of you no payment for this—only that whoever wills may take a path to his Lord.”
And put your trust in the Living, Who never dies; and celebrate His praises. Sufficient is He as the All-Informed Knower of the faults of His servants.
He who created the heavens and the earth and everything between them in six stages—then He settled on the Throne. The Most Merciful. Ask about Him a well-informed.
And when it is said to them, “Prostrate before the Compassionate,” they say, “And what is the Compassionate? Are we to prostrate before whatever you command us?” And it increases them in aversion.
Blessed is He who placed constellations in the sky—and placed in it a lamp, and a luminous moon.
And it is He who made the night and the day successive—for whoever desires to reflect, or desires to show gratitude.
The worshipers of the Gracious are those who walk on the earth modestly, and when the ignorant address them, they say, “Peace.”
And those who pass the night before their Lord, prostrating and standing.
And those who say, ‘‘Our Lord! Avert the suffering of Hell from us! Its suffering is continuous.
It is a miserable residence and destination.”
And those who, when they spend, are neither wasteful nor stingy, but choose a course in between.
And those who do not implore besides Allah any other god, and do not kill the soul which Allah has made sacred—except in the pursuit of justice—and do not commit adultery. Whoever does that will face penalties.
The punishment will be multiplied for him on the Day of Resurrection, and he will remain in it forever, humiliated.
Except for those who repent, and believe, and perform righteous deeds. These—Allah will replace their bad deeds with good deeds. Allah is ever Forgiving, Most Merciful.
Whoever repents and acts righteously—has returned to Allah in repentance.
And those who do not bear false witness, and when they come across indecencies, they pass by with dignity.
And those who, when reminded of their Lord’s revelations, do not fall against them deaf and blind.
And those who say, “Our Lord! Give us comfort in our spouses and offspring. And make us a good example for the righteous.”
It is they who will be awarded the Chamber for having persevered—and will be greeted there with salutations and peace.
Remaining in there forever—it is an excellent residence and destination.
Say, “What weight would my Lord give you, were it not for your prayer? But you have denied, and it will be inevitable.”
Ta. Seen. Meem.
These are the Verses of the Clarifying Book.
Perhaps you will destroy yourself with grief: because they do not become believers.
If We will, We can send down upon them a sign from heaven, leaving their necks bent in submission to it.
No fresh reminder comes to them from the Most Merciful, but they turn away from it.
They have lied; but soon will come to them the news of what they ridiculed.
Do they not see the earth, and how many beautiful pairs We produced in it?
Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
Most surely, your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
When your Lord called out to Moses, “Go to the tyrannical people.
The people of Pharaoh. Will they not fear?”
He said, “My Lord, I fear they will reject me.
And I become stressed, and my tongue is not fluent, so send Aaron too.
And they have a charge against me, so I fear they may kill me.”
He said, “No. Go, both of you, with Our proofs. We are with you, listening.
Go to Pharaoh, and say, ‘We are messengers from the Lord of all Worlds.
Let the Children of Israel go with us.'”
He said, “Did we not raise you among us as a child, and you stayed among us for many of your years?
And you committed that deed of yours, and you were ungrateful.”
He said, “I did it then—when I was misguided.
And I fled from you when I feared you; but my Lord gave me wisdom, and He made me one of the messengers.
Is that the favor you taunt me with, although you have enslaved the Children of Israel?”
Pharaoh said, “And what is the Lord of the Worlds?”
He said, “The Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them—if you only knew.”
He said to those around him, “Do you not hear?”
He said, “Your Lord, and the Lord of your ancestors of old.”
He said, “This messenger of yours, who is sent to you, is crazy.”
He said, “Lord of the East and the West, and everything between them—if you understand.”
He said, “If you take any other god besides me, I will have you imprisoned.”
He said, “What if I bring you something convincing?”
He said, “Bring it—if what you say is true.”
So he threw his cane; and it was a serpent, plain to see.
And he pulled his hand; and it was white, for all to see.
He said to the dignitaries around him, “This is a skilled magician.
He wants to expel you from your land with his magic, so what do you recommend?”
They said, “Leave him and his brother for a while. And send recruiters to the cities.
To bring to you every experienced magician.”
So the magicians assembled at the set time on the appointed day.
And it was said to the people, “Would you come together?
So that we may follow the magicians: if they are the victors.”
When the magicians arrived, they said to Pharaoh, “Is there a reward for us, if we are the winners?”
He said, “Yes, and you will be among those closest to me.”
Moses said to them, “Present whatever you wish to present.”
So they threw their ropes and their sticks, and said, “By the majesty of Pharaoh, we will be the victors.”
Then Moses threw his cane, and it began swallowing their trickery.
And the magicians fell down, in prostration.
They said, “We have believed in the Lord of the Worlds.
The Lord of Moses and Aaron.”
He said, “Did you believe in Him before I have given you permission? He must be your superior who taught you magic, but soon you will know. I will cut off your hands and feet on opposite sides, and I crucify you all.”
They said, “No problem. To our Lord, we will return.
We are eager for our Lord to forgive us our sins—since we are the first of the believers.”
And We inspired Moses: “Travel with My servants at night, and you will be pursued.”
Then Pharaoh sent marshals to the cities.
“These are a small gang.
But they are offending us.
And we are a vigilant multitude.”
So We expelled them from gardens and springs.
And treasures, and splendid residences.
So it was. And We awarded it to the Children of Israel.
And they followed them at sunrise.
When the two groups sighted one another, the companions of Moses said, “We are overtaken!”
He said, “No! My Lord is with me; He will guide me.”
And We inspired Moses: “Strike the sea with your cane.” And it parted. And each part was like a huge hill.
And We drew the others near.
And We saved Moses and those with him, all together.
Then We drowned the others.
Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
And relate to them the story of Abraham.
When he said to his father and his people, “What are you worshiping?”
They said, “We worship idols, and we remain devoted to them.”
He said, “Do they hear you when you pray?
Or do they benefit you, or harm you?”
They said, “But we found our ancestors doing so.”
He said, “Have you considered what you worship.
You and your ancient ancestors?
They are enemies to me, except the Lord of the Worlds.
He who created me, and guides me.
He who feeds me, and gives me drink.
And when I get sick, He heals me.
He who makes me die, and then revives me.
And Who I hope will forgive me my sins on the Day of Judgment.”
“My Lord! Grant me wisdom, and join me with the righteous.
And give me a reputation of truth among the others.
And make me of those awarded the Garden of Bliss.
And forgive my father—he was one of the misguided.
And do not disgrace me on the Day they are resurrected.
The Day when neither wealth nor children can help.
Except for him who comes to Allah with a sound heart.”
And the Garden will be brought near for the righteous.
And the Blaze will be displayed to the deviators.
And it will be said to them, “Where are those you used to worship?”
Besides Allah? Can they help you, or help themselves?”
So they will be toppled into it, together with the seducers.
And the soldiers of Iblis, all of them.
They will say, as they feud in it.
“By Allah, We were in obvious error.
For equating you with the Lord of the Worlds.
And none misled us except the wicked.
Now we have no intercessors.
And no true friend.
If only we could have another chance, we would be of the believers.”
Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
And your Lord is certainly the Almighty, the Merciful.
The people of Noah denied the messengers.
When their brother Noah said to them, “Will you not be cautious?
I am to you a trustworthy messenger.
So fear Allah, and obey me.
I ask of you no payment for this. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.
So reverence Allah, and obey me.”
They said, “Shall we believe in you? When the lowliest follow you.”
He said, “What do I know about what they used to do?
Their reckoning is only with my Lord—if you have any sense.
And I am not about to drive away the believers.
I am only a clear warner.”
They said, “If you do not refrain, O Noah, you will be among the stoned.”
He said, “My Lord, my people have rejected me.
So judge between me and them decisively. And save me, and the believers who are with me.
So We saved him and those with him in the fully loaded Ark.
Then afterward We drowned the rest.
Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
Aad disbelieved the messengers.
When their brother Hud said to them, “Do you not fear?
I am to you an honest messenger.
So reverence Allah, and obey me.
I ask of you no payment for this. My payment is only from the Lord of the Worlds.
Do you build a monument on every height for vanity's sake?
And you construct fortresses, hoping to live forever?
And when you strike, you strike mercilessly?
So reverence Allah, and obey me.
And reverence Him who supplied you with everything you know.
He supplied you with livestock and children.
And gardens and springs.
I fear for you the punishment of a terrible Day.”
They said, “It is the same for us, whether you lecture us, or do not lecture.
This is nothing but the morals of the ancients.
And we are not to be punished.”
So they denied him, so We destroyed them. There is a sign in this, but most of them are not believers.
Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
Thamood denied the messengers.
When their brother Saleh said to them, “Do you not fear?
I am a sincere messenger to you.
So fear Allah, and obey me.
I ask of you no payment for this. My reward is only from the Lord of the Universe.
Will you be left secure in what is here?
In gardens and springs?
And plantations, and palm-trees with tender fruits?
And you skillfully carve dwellings in the mountains?
So reverence Allah, and obey me.
And do not obey the command of the extravagant.
Those who work corruption on earth, and do not reform.”
They said, “You are surely bewitched.
You are nothing but a human like us. So bring a sign, if you are truthful.
He said, “This is a camel. She has her turn of drinking, and you have your turn of drinking—on a known day.
And do not touch her with harm, lest you be seized by the punishment of a tremendous day.”
But they hamstrung her, and they became full of remorse.
So the punishment seized them. Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
The people of Lot rejected the messengers.
When their brother Lot said to them, “Do you not fear?
I am to you an honest messenger.
So fear Allah, and obey me.
I ask of you no reward for it. My reward is only from the Lord of the Worlds.
Do you approach the males of the world?
And forsake the wives your Lord created for you? Indeed, you are intrusive people.”
They said, “Unless you refrain, O Lot, you will be expelled.”
He said, “I deplore what you do.”
“My Lord! Save me and my family from what they do.”
So We saved him and his family, all together.
Except for an old woman among those who lagged behind.
Then We destroyed the others.
And We rained down on them a rain. Dreadful is the rain of those forewarned.
Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
The inhabitants of the Woods denied the messengers.
When Shuaib said to them, “Do you not fear?
I am to you a trustworthy messenger.
So be cautious of Allah, and obey me.
I ask of you no payment for this. My payment is only from the Lord of the Universe.
Give full measure. And do not cheat.
And weigh with accurate scales.
And do not defraud people of their belongings. And do not spread corruption in the land.
And reverence Him who created you and the masses of old.”
They said, “You are one of the bewitched.
And you are nothing but a human like us, and we think you are a liar.
So bring down on us pieces from the sky, if you are truthful.”
He said, “My Lord is Well Aware of what you do.”
So they denied him. So the punishment of the day of gloom gripped them. It was the punishment of a tremendous day.
Surely in this is a sign, but most of them are not believers.
Your Lord is the Almighty, the Merciful.
It is a revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.
The Honest Spirit came down with it.
Upon your heart, so that you may be of the Warners.
In a clear Arabic language.
And it is in the scriptures of the ancients.
Is it not a sign for them that it was recognized by the scholars of the Children of Israel?
Had We revealed it to one of the foreigners.
And he recited it to them, they still would not have believed in it.
Thus We pass it through the hearts of the guilty.
They will not believe in it—until they see the painful punishment.
It will come upon them suddenly—when they are unaware.
Then they will say, “Can we be given more time?”
Do they seek to expedite Our punishment?
Have you considered: if We allowed them enjoyment for years.
And there came to them what they were promised.
Of what avail to them will be their past enjoyments?
Never did We destroy a town, but it had warners.
As a reminder—We are never unjust.
It was not the devils that revealed it.
It is not in their interest, nor in their power.
They are barred from hearing.
So do not pray to another god with Allah, lest you be among the tormented.
And warn your near relatives.
And lower your wing to the believers who follow you.
And if they disobey you, say, “I am innocent of what you do.”
And put your trust in the Almighty, the Merciful.
He Who sees you when you rise.
And your devotions amidst the worshipers.
He is the Hearer, the Aware.
Shall I inform you upon whom the devils descend?
They descend upon every sinful liar.
They give ear, and most of them are liars.
As for the poets—the deviators follow them.
Do you not see how they ramble in every style?
And how they say what they do not do?
Except for those who believe, and do righteous deeds, and remember Allah often, and defend themselves after they were wronged. As for those who do wrong, they will know to what homecoming they will return.
Ta. Seen. These are the Signs of the Quran—a book that makes things clear.
Guidance and good news for the believers.
Those who perform the prayer, and give charity regularly, and are certain of the Hereafter.
As for those who do not believe in the Hereafter: We made their deeds appear good to them, so they wander aimlessly.
It is they who will suffer a dreadful torment—and in the Hereafter, they will be the worst losers.
You are receiving the Quran from an All-Wise, All-Knowing.
When Moses said to his family, “I have noticed a fire. I will bring you some news from it; or bring you a torch, so that you may warm yourselves.”
Then, when he reached it, he was called: “Blessed is the One at the fire, and whoever is around it. And glory be to Allah, Lord of Humankind.
O, Moses, It is I, Allah, the Almighty, the Wise.
Throw down your cane.” And when he saw it quivering, as if it were a demon, he turned around, not looking back. “O Moses, do not fear, the messengers do not fear in My presence.
But whoever has done wrong, and then substitutes goodness in place of evil, then I am Forgiving and Merciful.
Put your hand in your pocket; it will come out white, without blemish—among nine miracles to Pharaoh and his people; they are immoral people.”
Yet when Our eye-opening miracles came to them, they said, “This is obvious witchcraft.”
And they rejected them, although their souls were certain of them, out of wickedness and pride. See, then, how was the end of the mischief-makers.
And We gave David and Solomon knowledge. And they said, “Praise be to Allah, who has favored us over many of His believing servants.”
And Solomon succeeded David. He said, “O people, we were taught the language of birds, and we were given of all things. This is indeed the obvious grace.”
And gathered for Solomon were his troops of sprites, men, and birds—all held in strict order.
Until, when they came upon the Valley of the Ants, an ant said, “O ants, go into your dwellings, lest Solomon and his troops crush you, while they are unaware.”
So he smiled, laughing at her words, and said, “My Lord, direct me to be thankful for Your blessings that You bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and to work righteousness, pleasing you. And admit me, by Your grace, into the company of Your virtuous worshipers.”
Then he surveyed the birds, and said, “How is it that I do not see the hoopoe? Or is he among the absentees?
I will punish him most severely, or slay him—unless he brings me a valid excuse.”
But he did not stay away for long. He said, “I have learned something you did not know. I have come to you from Sheba, with reliable information.
I found a woman ruling over them, and she was given of all things, and she has a magnificent throne.
I found her and her people worshiping the sun, instead of Allah. And Satan beautified their deeds for them, and he diverted them from the path, so they are not guided.
If only they would worship Allah, who brings what is hidden in the heavens and on earth, and who knows what you hide and what you disclose.
Allah—There is no god except He, Lord of the Awesome Throne.”
He said, “We will see, whether you have told the truth, or are a liar.
Go with this letter of mine, and deliver it to them. Then withdraw from them, and see how they respond.”
She said, “O Counselors, a gracious letter was delivered to me.
It is from Solomon, and it is: ‘In the Name of Allah, the Compassionate, the Merciful.
Do not exalt yourselves over me, but come to me submissively.’”
She said, “O counselors, advise me in this matter of mine. I never make a decision unless you are present.”
They said, “We are a people of strength and great courage, but the decision is yours, so see what you command.”
She said, “When kings enter a town, they devastate it, and subjugate its dignified people. Thus they always do.
And I am sending them a gift, and will see what the envoys bring back.”
But When it came to Solomon, he said, “Are you offering me wealth? What Allah has given me is better than what He has given you. It is you who delight in your gift.
Go back to them. We will come at them with troops they cannot withstand; and we will expel them from there, humiliated and subdued.”
He said, “O notables, which of you can bring me her throne before they come to me in submission?”
An imp of the sprites said, “I can bring it to you before you rise from your position. I am strong enough to do it—and trustworthy.”
He who had knowledge from the Scripture said, “I can bring it to you before you blink.” And when he saw it settled before him, he said, “This is of my Lord’s grace, to test me, whether I am appreciative or unappreciative. Whoever is grateful, his gratitude is for his own soul; and whoever is ungrateful—my Lord is Independent and Generous.”
He said, “Disguise her throne for her, and we shall see whether she will be guided, or remains one of the misguided.”
Then, when she arrived, it was said, “Is your throne like this?” She said, “As if this is it.” “And we were given knowledge before her, and we were submitters.”
But she was prevented by what she worshiped instead of Allah—she belonged to a disbelieving people.
It was said to her, “Go inside the courtyard.” And when she saw it, she thought it was a pool, and she uncovered her legs. He said, “It is a courtyard paved with crystal.” She said, “My Lord, I have wronged myself, and I have submitted with Solomon, to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.”
And We sent to Thamood their brother Saleh: “Worship Allah.” But they became two disputing factions.
He said, “O my people, why do you rush to evil instead of to good? Why do you not ask forgiveness from Allah, so that you may receive mercy?”
They said, “We consider you a bad omen—and those with you.” He said, “Your omen is with Allah. In fact, you are a people being tested.”
In the city was a gang of nine who made mischief in the land, and would not reform.
They said, “Swear by Allah to one another that we will attack him and his family at night, and then say to his guardian, 'We did not witness the murder of his family, and we are being truthful.'”
They planned a plan, and We planned a plan, but they did not realize.
So note the outcome of their planning: We destroyed them and their people, all together.
Here are their houses, in ruins, on account of their iniquities. Surely in this is a lesson for people who know.
And We saved those who believed and were reverent.
And Lot, when he said to his people, “Do you commit lewdness, although you see?
Do you lust after men instead of women? You are an ignorant people.”
But his people’s only response was to say, “Expel Lot’s family from your town. They are purist people.”
So We saved him and his family, except for his wife; We destined her among the laggards.
And We poured down on them a rain. Horrible was the rain of those forewarned.
Say, “Praise be to Allah, and peace be upon His worshipers whom He has chosen. Is Allah better, or what they associate?”
Or, who created the heavens and the earth, and sends water down from the sky for you? With it, We produce gardens full of beauty, whose trees you could not have produced. Is there a god alongside Allah? But they are a people who equate.
Or, who made the earth a habitat, and caused rivers to flow through it, and set mountains on it, and placed a partition between the two seas? Is there a god alongside Allah? But most of them do not know.
Or, who answers the distressed when he prays to Him, and removes adversity, and makes you successors on earth? Is there a god alongside Allah? How little you reflect.
Or, who guides you through the darkness of land and sea, and who sends the winds, ushering in His mercy? Is there a god alongside Allah? Exalted is Allah, above the partners they ascribe.
Or, who originates the creation, and then repeats it, and who gives you livelihood from the sky and the earth? Is there a god alongside Allah? Say, “Bring your evidence, if you are truthful.”
Say, “None in the heavens or on earth knows the future except Allah, and they do not perceive when they will be resurrected.”
In fact, their knowledge of the Hereafter is confused. In fact, they are in doubt about it. In fact, they are blind to it.
Those who disbelieve say, “When we have become dust, and our ancestors, will we be brought out?
We were promised this before, us and our ancestors—these are nothing but legends of the ancients.”
Say, travel throughout the earth, and observe the fate of the guilty.”
But do not grieve over them, nor be distressed by what they plot.
And they say, “When will this promise come true—if you are truthful?”
Say, “Perhaps, some of what you are eager for has drawn near.”
And your Lord is gracious towards the people, but most of them do not give thanks.
And your Lord knows what their hearts conceal, and what they reveal.
There is no mystery in the heaven and the earth, but is in a Clear Book.
This Quran relates to the Children of Israel most of what they disagree about.
And it is guidance and mercy for the believers.
Your Lord will judge between them with His command. He is the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
So rely on Allah. You are upon the clear truth.
You cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn their backs and flee.
Nor can you lead the blind out of their error. You can make none hear except those who believe in Our revelations and are submitters.
And when the Word has fallen on them, We will bring out for them a creature from the earth that will speak to them of how humanity was not certain of Our revelations.
On the Day when We gather from every community a group of those who rejected Our revelations—and they will be restrained.
Until, when they arrive, He will say, “Did you deny My revelations without understanding them? Or what were you doing?”
And the Word will come upon them for having done wrong, and they will not speak.
Have they not considered that We made the night for them to rest in, and the day for visibility? Surely in this are signs for people who believe.
And on the Day when the Trumpet is blown, everyone in the heavens and the earth will be horrified, except whom Allah wills. And all will come before Him, fully humbled.
And you see the mountains, and you imagine them fixed. Yet they pass, as the passing of the clouds. The making of Allah, who perfected everything. He is fully Informed of whatever you do.
Whoever brings a virtue will receive better than it—and they will be safe from the horrors of that Day.
But whoever brings evil—their faces will be tumbled into the Fire. Are you repaid except for what you used to do?
“I was commanded to worship the Lord of this town, Who has sanctified it; and to Him, everything belongs. And I was commanded to be of those who submit.
And to read the Quran.” Whoever is guided—is guided for his own soul. And whoever is astray, then say, “I am only a warner.”
And say, “Praise be to Allah. He will show you His signs, and you will recognize them. And Your Lord is not negligent of what you do.”
Ta. Seen. Meem.
These are the Verses of the Clear Book.
We narrate to you from the history of Moses and Pharaoh—in truth—for people who believe.
Pharaoh exalted himself in the land, and he divided its people into factions. Oppressing a group of them: slaughtering their sons, while sparing their women. He was one of the corrupters.
But We intended to favor those who were oppressed in the land, and to make them leaders, and to make them the inheritors.
And to establish them in the land; and to show Pharaoh, Hamaan, and their soldiers, the very thing they feared.
And We inspired the mother of Moses: “Nurse him; but when you fear for him, put him into the river, and do not fear, nor be sad. We will return him to you, and will make him one of the messengers.”
Pharaoh’s household picked him up, only to become their enemy and a source of grief. Pharaoh, Hamaan, and their soldiers were sinful.
Pharaoh’s wife said, “An eye's delight for me and for you. Do not kill him; perhaps he will be useful to us, or we may adopt him as a son.” But they did not foresee.
The heart of Moses’ mother became empty. She was about to disclose him, had We not steadied her heart, so that she may remain a believer.
She said to his sister, “Keep track of him.” So she watched him from a distance, yet they were unaware.
And We forbade him breastfeeding at first. So she said, “Shall I direct you to a family that will raise him for you, and will look after him?”
Thus We returned him to his mother, so that she may be comforted, and not grieve, and know that Allah’s promise is true. But most of them do not know.
And when he reached full strength and maturity, We gave him wisdom and knowledge. Thus We reward the virtuous.
Once he entered the city, unnoticed by its people. There He found two men fighting. One from his own people, and the other from his enemies. The one from his people called to him for help against the one from his enemies. So Moses struck him, and put an end to him. He said, “This is from Satan's doing. He is an enemy that openly misleads.”
He said, “My Lord, I have wronged myself, so forgive me.” So He forgave him. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.
He said, “My Lord! Because of Your favors upon me, I will never be a supporter of the guilty.”
The next morning, he went about in the city, fearful and vigilant, when the man who had sought his help the day before was shouting out to him. Moses said to him, “You are clearly a troublemaker.”
As he was about to strike the one who was their enemy, he said, “O Moses, do you intend to kill me, as you killed someone yesterday? You only want to be a bully in the land, and you don’t want to be a peacemaker.”
And there came a man, rushing from the outskirts of the city, saying, “O Moses, the authorities are conspiring against you, to kill you, so get out; I am giving you good advice.”
So he left, fearful and vigilant. He said, “My Lord, save me from the wrongdoing people.”
And as he headed towards Median, he said, “Perhaps my Lord will guide me to the right way.”
And when he reached Midian’s water, he found there a crowd of people drawing water, and he noticed two women waiting on the side. He said, “What is the matter with you?” They said, “We cannot draw water until the shepherds depart, and our father is a very old man.”
So he drew water for them. Then he withdrew to the shade, and said, “My Lord, I am in dire need of whatever good you might send down to me.”
Then, one of the two women approached him, walking bashfully. She said, “My father is inviting you, to compensate you for having drawn water for us.” And when he came and told him the story, he said, “Do not fear, you have escaped from the wrongdoing people.”
One of the two women said, “Father, hire him. The best employee for you is the strong and trustworthy.”
He said, “I wish to marry you to one of these two daughters of mine, provided you stay in my service for eight years. But if you complete ten, it is up to you. I do not intend to be hard on you. You will find me, Allah willing, of the righteous.”
He said, “Let this be an agreement between you and me. Whichever of the two terms I complete, there shall be no reprisal against me. And Allah is Guardian over what we say.”
When Moses completed the term and departed with his family, he noticed a fire by the side of the Mount. He said to his family, “Stay here; I have glimpsed a fire. Perhaps I can bring you some information from there, or a torch from the fire, so that you may warm yourselves.”
And when he reached it, he was called from the right bank of the valley, at the Sacred Ground, from the bush: “O Moses, it is I, Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
Throw down your cane.” And when he saw it wiggling, as if it were possessed, he turned in retreat without returning. “O Moses, draw near, and do not fear, you are perfectly safe.
Put your hand inside your pocket, and it will come out white, without blemish. And press your arm to your side, against fear. These are two proofs from your Lord, to Pharaoh and his chiefs. They are sinful people.”
He said, “My Lord, I have killed one of them, so I fear they will kill me.
And my brother Aaron: he is more eloquent than me in speech, so send him with me, to help me, and to confirm my words, for I fear they will reject me.”
He said, “We will strengthen you with your brother, and We will give you authority—so they cannot reach you. By virtue of Our signs, you and those who follow you will be the victors.”
But when Moses came to them with Our proofs, clear and obvious, they said, “This is nothing but fabricated magic, and We never heard of this from our ancestors of old.”
Moses said, “My Lord knows best who brings guidance from Him, and who will have the final Home. The wrongdoers will not succeed.”
Pharaoh said, “O nobles, I know of no god for you other than me. So fire-up the bricks for me, O Hamaan, and make me a tower, so I may look at the God of Moses, although I think he is a liar.”
He and his soldiers acted arrogantly in the land, with no justification. They thought they would not be returned to Us.
So We seized him and his soldiers, and We threw them into the sea. Observe, therefore, what the end of the oppressors was.
And We made them leaders calling to the Fire. And on Resurrection Day, they will not be helped.
And We pursued them in this world with a curse. And on Resurrection Day, they will be among the uglified.
And We gave Moses the Scripture—after We had destroyed the previous generations—as insight for people, and guidance and mercy, so that they may reflect.
You were not on the Western Side when We entrusted the Commandments to Moses, nor were you of the witnesses.
But We established many generations, and life grew long for them. Nor were you among the people of Median, reading Our revelations to them. But We kept sending messengers.
Nor were you by the side of the Mount when We announced. But it was a mercy from your Lord, to warn a people who received no warner before you, so they may take notice.
Otherwise, if a calamity befell them because of what their hands have perpetrated, they would say, “Our Lord, if only You had sent us a messenger, we would have followed Your revelations, and been among the believers.”
But when the truth came to them from Us, they said, “If only he was given the like of what was given to Moses.” Did they not deny what was given to Moses in the past? They said, “Two works of magic, backing one another.” And they said, “We are rejecting both.”
Say, “Then bring a scripture from Allah, more conducive to guidance than both, and I will follow it—if you are truthful.”
But if they do not respond to you, then know that they follow their fancies. And who is more lost than he who follows his fancy without guidance from Allah? Allah does not guide the unjust people.
We have conveyed to them the Word, so they may reflect.
Those to whom We gave the Scripture before it—they are believers in it.
And when it is read to them, they say, “We believe in it; it is the truth from our Lord; we were Submitters prior to it.”
These will be given their reward twice—because they persevered. And they counter bad with good. And from Our provisions to them, they give.
And when they hear vain talk, they turn away from it, and say, “We have our deeds, and you have your deeds; peace be upon you; we do not desire the ignorant.”
You cannot guide whom you love, but Allah guides whom He wills, and He knows best those who are guided.
And they say, “If we follow the guidance with you, we will be snatched away from our land.” Did we not establish for them a Safe Sanctuary, to which fruits of all kinds are brought, as a provision from Us? But most of them do not know.
And how many a town have We destroyed who exulted in their life of ease? Here are their dwellings, uninhabited after them, except for a few. And We are the Inheritors.
Your Lord never destroys towns without first sending a messenger in their midst, reading to them Our revelations. And We never destroy towns, unless their people are wrongdoers.
Whatever you are given is only the enjoyment of this life—and its glitter. But what is with Allah is better, and longer-lasting. Do you not comprehend?
Can someone to whom We promised a good promise—which he will attain—be equal to someone to whom We gave enjoyments in this world, but who will be, on Resurrection Day, among the arraigned?
On the Day when He calls out to them, and He says, “Where are My partners, those whom you claimed?”
Those against whom the Word is justified will say, “Our Lord, these are the ones we caused to deviate. We caused them to deviate, as we ourselves deviated. We declare our innocence to You. It was not us they worshiped.”
And it will be said, “Call on your partners.” And they will call on them, but they will not answer them. And they will see the suffering. If only they were guided!
On the Day when He calls out to them, and He says, “what did you answer the Messengers?”
They will be blinded by the facts on that Day, and they will not ask one another.
As for he who repents, believes, and works righteousness: he may well be among the winners.
Your Lord creates whatever He wills, and He chooses. The choice is not theirs. Glory be to Allah, and exalted is He above the associations they make.
And your Lord knows what their hearts conceal, and what they disclose.
He is Allah. There is no god except He. To Him belongs all praise in this life, and in the next. All authority is His. And to Him, you will be returned.
Say, “Have you considered? If Allah were to make the night continuous over you until the Day of Resurrection, which god other than Allah could bring you light? Do you not listen?”
Say, “Have you considered? If Allah were to make the day continuous over you until the Day of Resurrection, which god other than Allah could bring you night, to rest in? Do you not see?”
Out of His mercy, He made for you the night and the day, so that you may rest in it, and to seek of His bounty, so that you may give thanks.
On the Day when He calls out to them, and He says, “Where are My associates, those whom you claimed?”
And We will pull a witness from every group, then say, “Produce your evidence.” Then they will realize that the truth is Allah’s, and those they used to invent have abandoned them.
Korah belonged to the people of Moses, but he exploited them. We had given him treasures, the keys of which would burden a group of strong men. When his people said to him, “Do not be overjoyed; Allah does not like the exultant.
But seek, with what Allah has given you, the Home of the Hereafter. And do not neglect your share of this world. And be charitable, as Allah is charitable to you. And do not work corruption on earth—Allah does not like the corruptors.”
He said, “I was able to obtain this because of the knowledge I have.” Did he not know that Allah has destroyed generations before him, who were stronger than him, and possessed greater riches? But the guilty will not be asked about their sins.
And he came out before his people in his splendor. Those who desired the worldly life said, “If only we possessed the likes of what Korah was given. He is truly very fortunate.”
But those gifted with knowledge said, “Woe to you! The reward of Allah is better for those who believe and work righteousness.” Yet none attains it except the patient.
So We caused the earth to cave in on him and his mansion. He had no company to save him from Allah, nor could he defend himself.
And those who desired his position the day before were saying, “Alas! It seems Allah gives abundantly to whom He wills of His servants, or sparingly. Had Allah not been gracious to us, He would have caved in on us. Oh, certainly, the ungrateful never prosper.”
That Home of the Hereafter—We reserve it to those who seek no superiority on earth, nor corruption. And the outcome is for the cautious.
Whoever comes with virtue will have what is better. But whoever comes with evil—the evildoers will be punished only for what they used to do.
He Who mandated the Quran to you will return you Home. Say, “My Lord knows best anyone who brought the guidance, and who is in obvious error.”
You did not expect the Scripture to be transmitted to you, except mercy from your Lord. So do not be a supporter of the unbelievers.
And do not let them divert you from Allah’s revelations after they have been revealed to you. And pray to your Lord, and never be of the associators.
And do not call upon another god along with Allah—there is no god but He. All things perish, except His essence. Judgment belongs to Him. And to Him, you will be returned.
Alif. Lam. Meem.
Do people think they will be left alone to say, "We believe," without being tested?
We tested those before them. Allah certainly knows those who are thankful, and He certainly knows the liars.
Or do those who commit bad deeds think they can outdo us? Terrible is their judgment!
Whoever looks forward to the meeting with Allah—Allah's appointed time is coming. He is the Hearing, the Knowing.
Whoever strives, strives only for himself. Allah is beyond the need of the worlds.
Those who believe and do good works: We will remit their sins, and We will reward them according to the best of what they used to do.
We have advised the human being to be good to his parents. But if they urge you to associate with Me what you have no knowledge of, do not obey them. To Me is your return, and I will inform you of what you used to do.
Those who believe and do good works: We will admit them with the righteous.
And among the people are those who say, “We have believed in Allah.” But if he is harmed for the sake of Allah, he equates people's persecution with Allah’s retribution. And if help comes from your Lord, he will say, “We were with you.” Does Allah not know what lies in the chests of all beings?
Allah certainly knows those who believe, and He certainly knows the hypocrites.
Those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “Follow our path, and we will carry your sins.” In no way can they carry any of their sins. They are liars.
They will carry their own loads—and other loads with their own loads. And they will be questioned on the Day of Resurrection about what they used to fabricate.
We sent Noah to his people, and He remained among them for a thousand years, less fifty years. Then the Deluge overtook them while they were wrongdoers.
But We saved him, together with the Ark's occupants, and We made it a sign for all people.
And Abraham, when he said to his people, “Worship Allah and reverence Him. That is better for you—if you only knew.
You worship idols besides Allah, and you fabricate falsehoods. Those you worship, instead of Allah, cannot provide you with a livelihood. So seek your livelihood from Allah, and worship Him, and be thankful to Him. To Him, you will be returned.”
If you deny, communities before you also denied. The Messenger’s duty is only clear proclamation.
Have they not considered how Allah originates creation, and then reproduces it? That is easy for Allah.
Say, “Roam the earth, and observe how He originated creation.” Then Allah will bring about the next existence. Allah is Powerful over all things.”
He punishes whom He wills, and He shows mercy to whom He wills. And to Him, you will be restored.
You cannot escape on earth, nor in heaven. And apart from Allah, you have no protector, nor helper.
Those who disbelieve in Allah’s communications and in the meeting with Him—it is they who have despaired of My mercy, and for them is a painful punishment.
But the only response of his people was to say: “Kill him, or burn him!” But Allah saved him from the fire. Surely in this are signs for people who believe.
And he said, “You have chosen idols instead of Allah, out of affection for one another in this worldly life. But then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will disown one another, and curse one another, and your home will be the Fire, and you will have no helpers.”
Then Lot believed in him, and said, “I am emigrating to my Lord. He is the Noble, the Wise.”
And We granted him Isaac and Jacob, and We bestowed on his descendants Prophethood and the Scripture. And We gave him his reward in this life. And in the Hereafter, he will be among the upright.
And Lot, when he said to his people, “You are committing an obscenity not committed by anyone before you in the world.
You approach men, and cut off the highway, and commit lewdness in your gatherings.” But his people’s only response was to say, “Bring Allah’s punishment upon us, if you are truthful.”
He said, “My Lord, help me against the people of corruption.”
And when Our Envoys came to Abraham with the good news, they said, “We will destroy the people of this town—its people are wrongdoers.”
He said, “But Lot is in it.” They said, “We are well aware of who is in it. We will save him and his family, except for his wife, she will be among those remaining behind.”
And when Our Envoys came to Lot, they were mistreated, and he was distressed by their arrival. They said, “Do not fear, nor grieve. We will save you and your family, except for your wife; she is among those lagging behind.”
“We will bring down upon the people of this town a scourge from heaven, because of their rebelliousness.”
And We left behind a clear trace of it, for people who understand.
And to Median, their brother Shuaib. He said, “O my people, serve Allah and anticipate the Last Day, and do not behave wickedly on earth, spreading corruption.”
But they rejected him, and so the tremor overtook them, and they were left motionless in their homes.
And Aad, and Thamood. It has become obvious to you from their dwellings. Satan embellished for them their deeds, barring them from the path, even though they could see.
And Korah, and Pharaoh, and Hamaan: Moses went to them with clear arguments, but they acted arrogantly in the land. And they could not get ahead.
Each We seized by his sin. Against some, We sent a sandstorm. And some were struck by the Blast. And some We caused the ground to cave in beneath them. And some We drowned. It was not Allah who wronged them, but it was they who wronged their own selves.
The similitude of those who take protectors other than Allah is that of the spider. It builds a home. But the most fragile of homes is the spider’s home; if they only knew.
Allah knows whatever they invoke besides Him. And He is the Almighty, the Wise.
These examples—We site them to the people, but none grasps them except the learned.
Allah created the heavens and the earth for a purpose. Surely in this is a sign for believers.
Recite what is revealed to you of the Scripture, and perform the prayer. The prayer prevents indecency and abomination. And the remembrance of Allah is more excellent. And Allah knows what you do.
And do not debate with the People of the Scripture except in the best manner possible, except those among them who do wrong. And say, “We believe in what was revealed to us, and in what was revealed to you, and our God and your God is One, and to Him we are submitters.”
Likewise, We revealed to you the Scripture. Those to whom We gave the Scripture believe in it. And among these are some who believe in it. None reject Our communications except the unbelievers.
You did not read any scripture before this, nor did you write it with your hand. Otherwise, the falsifiers would have doubted.
In fact, it is clear signs in the hearts of those given knowledge. And none deny Our revelations except the wrongdoers.
And they say, “If only a miracle was sent down to him from his Lord.” Say, “The Miracles are only with Allah, and I am only a clear warner.”
Does it not suffice them that We revealed to you the Scripture, recited to them? Surely in this is mercy and a reminder for people who believe.
Say, “Allah suffices as a witness between you and me. He knows everything in the heavens and on earth. Those who believe in vanity and reject Allah—it is they who are the losers.”
And they challenge you to expedite the punishment. Were it not for a specified time, the punishment would have come to them. But it will come upon them suddenly, while they are unaware.
And they dare you to expedite the punishment. But Hell will engulf the disbelievers.
On the Day when the punishment will overwhelm them: from above them, and from beneath their feet, and He will say, “Taste what you used to do!”
O My servants who have believed: My earth is vast, so worship only Me.
Every soul will taste death. Then to Us, you will be returned.
Those who believe and work righteousness—We will settle them in Paradise, in mansions under which rivers flow, to stay there forever. Excellent is the reward of the workers.
Those who endure patiently, and trust in their Lord.
How many a creature there is that does not carry its sustenance? Allah provides for them, and for you. He is the Hearer, the Knowledgeable.
And if you asked them, “Who created the heavens and the earth, and regulated the sun and the moon?” They would say, “Allah.” Then why do they deviate?
Allah outspreads the provision to whomever He wills of His servants, and He restricts it. Allah is Cognizant of all things.
And if you asked them, “Who sends water down from the sky, with which He revives the earth after its death?” They would say, “Allah.” Say, “Praise be to Allah.” But most of them do not think.
This worldly life is nothing but diversion and play. But the Home of the Hereafter is the Real Life—if they only knew.
When they embark on a vessel, they pray to Allah, devoting their faith to Him. But once He has delivered them safely to land, they attribute partners to Him.
To be ungrateful for what We have given them, and to enjoy themselves. They will come to know.
Do they not see how We established a Secure Sanctuary, while all around them people are being carried away? Do they believe in falsehood and reject Allah’s blessings?
Who is more unjust than he who fabricates lies and attributes them to Allah, or calls the truth a lie when it has come to him? Is there not in Hell a dwelling for the blasphemers?
And as for those who strive for Us: We will guide them in Our ways. And Allah is with the doers of good.
Alif. Lam. Meem.
The Romans were defeated.
In a nearby territory. But after their defeat, they will be victorious.
Within a few years. The matter is up to Allah, in the past, and in the future. On that day, the believers will rejoice.
In Allah’s victory. He gives victory to whom He wills. He is the Almighty, the Merciful.
The promise of Allah—Allah never breaks His promise, but most people do not know.
They know an outer aspect of the worldly life. But of the Hereafter, they are heedless.
Do they not reflect within themselves? Allah did not create the heavens and the earth, and what is between them, except in truth, and for a specific duration. But most people, regarding meeting their Lord, are in denial.
Have they not traveled the earth, and observed how those before them ended up? They were more powerful than them, and they cultivated the land and developed it more than they developed it, and their messengers came to them with clear proofs. Allah would never wrong them, but they used to wrong themselves.
Then, evil was the end of those who committed evil. That is because they rejected Allah’s revelations and ridiculed them.
Allah originates creation, then He repeats it. Then to Him, you will be returned.
On the Day when the Hour takes place, the guilty will despair.
They will have no intercessors from among their partners, and they will disown their partners.
On the Day when the Hour takes place—on that Day, they will separate.
As for those who believed and did good works—they will be delighted in meadows.
But as for those who disbelieved, and rejected Our signs and the meeting of the Hereafter—these will be hauled into the suffering.
So praise Allah when you retire at night, and when you rise in the morning.
His is the praise in the heavens and on earth, and in the evening, and when you reach midday.
He brings the living from the dead, and He brings the dead from the living, and He revives the land after its death. Likewise, you will be resurrected.
And among His signs is that He created you from dust—then—you are human beings spreading out.
And among His signs is that He created for you spouses from among yourselves, so that you may find tranquility in them; and He planted between you love and compassion. In this are signs for people who think.
And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the diversity of your languages and colors. In this are signs for the learned.
And among His signs is your sleep by night and day, and your pursuit of His bounties. In this are signs for people who listen.
And among His signs is that He shows you the lightning, causing fear and hope. And He sends down rain from the sky, and with it, He revives the earth after its death. In this are signs for people who understand.
And among His signs is that the sky and the earth persist by His command. And then, when He calls you from the earth, you will emerge at once.
And to Him belongs whoever is in the heavens and on earth—all are devoutly obedient to Him.
And it is He who starts the creation and then reproduces it—something easy for Him. And to Him belong the finest attributes in the heavens and on earth; and He is the Powerful, the Wise.
He illustrates an example for you, from your own selves: would you make your servants equal partners in the wealth We have given you? Do you revere them as you revere one another? Thus We explain the revelations for a people who understand.
Yet those who do wrong follow their desires without knowledge. But who can guide whom Allah leaves astray? And there are no helpers for them.
So devote yourself to the faith of monotheism—the natural way Allah has instilled in people. There is no change in Allah’s creation. This is the upright religion, but most people do not know.
Turning to Him. And be conscious of Him, and perform the prayer, and do not be of the polytheists.
Of those who divided their religion and became factions—each party rejoicing in what they have.
When harm touches the people, they call on their Lord, turning to Him in repentance. But then, when He lets them taste of His mercy, some of them attribute partners to their Lord.
To show ingratitude for what We have given them. Indulge yourselves—you will soon know.
Or have We sent down to them an authority which speaks of what they associated with Him?
And when We give people a taste of mercy, they rejoice in it. But when adversity befalls them, because of what their hands have perpetrated, they begin to despair.
Do they not consider that Allah expands the provision for whom He wills, or restricts it? Surely in this are signs for people who believe.
So give the relative his rights, and the destitute, and the wayfarer. That is best for those who seek Allah’s attention. It is they who are the successful.
The usury you practice, seeking thereby to increase people’s wealth, will not increase with Allah. But what you give in charity, desiring Allah’s attention—these are the multipliers.
Allah is He who created you, then provides for you, then makes you die, then brings you back to life. Can any of your partners do any of this? Glorified is He and Exalted above what they associate.
Corruption has appeared on land and sea, because of what people’s hands have earned, to make them taste some of what they have done, so they may return.
Say, “Travel through the earth, and observe the final fate of those who came before. Most of them were polytheists.”
So devote yourself to the lasting religion, before the coming of a Day from Allah that cannot be repelled. On that Day, they will be shocked.
Whoever disbelieves, his disbelief falls upon him. And whoever acts righteously—they are preparing for themselves.
So that He may reward those who believe and do good deeds, out of His grace. He does not love the unbelievers.
And of His signs is that He sends the winds, ushering in good news, to give you a taste of His mercy, and so that ships may sail by His command, and so that you may seek of His bounty, and so that you may give thanks.
We sent messengers to their people before you, and they brought them clear proofs. Then We took revenge on those who were guilty. It is incumbent on Us to help the believers.
Allah is He who sends the winds. They stir up clouds. Then He spreads them in the sky as He wills. And He breaks them apart. Then you see raindrops issuing from their midst. Then, when He makes it fall upon whom He wills of His servants, then they become cheerful.
Although, they were before this—before it was sent down on them—in despair.
So observe the impact of Allah’s mercy: how He revives the earth after its death. That is the Reviver of the dead, and He is capable of all things.
But if We send a wind, and they see it turning things yellow, they would continue thereafter to disbelieve.
You cannot make the dead hear, nor can you make the deaf hear the call when they turn away.
Nor can you lead the blind out of their misguidance. You can make none hear, except those who believe in Our messages and are submitters.
Allah is He Who created you weak, then after weakness, He gave you strength, then after strength, He gave you weakness and gray hair. He creates whatever He wills. He is the Knowing, the Able.
On the Day when the Hour takes place, the guilty will swear they had stayed for only an hour. Thus they were deluded.
But those endowed with knowledge and faith will say, “You remained in Allah’s Book until the Day of Resurrection. This is the Day of Resurrection, but you did not know.”
On that day, the excuses of those who did wrong will not benefit them, nor can they make amends.
We have cited in this Quran for people every sort of parable. And even if you were to bring them a miracle, those who disbelieve would say, “You are nothing but falsifiers.”
Thus Allah seals the hearts of those who do not know.
So be patient. The promise of Allah is true. And let not those who lack certainty belittle you.
Alif. Lam. Meem.
These are the Signs of the Wise Book.
Guidance and mercy for the good-doers.
Those who perform the prayer, and give the purifying charity, and are certain of the Hereafter.
These are upon guidance from their Lord. These are the successful.
And among the people is he who trades in distracting tales; intending, without knowledge, to lead away from Allah’s way, and to make a mockery of it. These will have a humiliating punishment.
And when Our Verses are recited to him, he turns away in pride, as though he did not hear them, as though there is deafness in his ears. So inform him of a painful punishment.
As for those who believe and do good deeds—for them are the Gardens of Bliss.
Where they will remain forever. The promise of Allah is true. He is the Mighty, the Wise.
He created the heavens without pillars that you see, and He placed stabilizers on earth lest it shakes with you, and He scattered throughout it every kind of creature. And We sent down water from the sky, and We caused every noble pair to grow therein.
This is Allah’s creation. Now show me what those besides Him created. In fact, the unjust are clearly lost.
We endowed Luqman with wisdom: “Be thankful to Allah.” Whoever is appreciative—is appreciative for the benefit of his own soul. And whoever is unappreciative—Allah is Self-Sufficient, Praiseworthy.
When Luqman said to his son, as he advised him, “O my son! Do not associate with Allah—idolatry is a terrible wrong.”
And We entrusted the human being with the care of his parents. His mother carried him through hardship upon hardship, and his weaning takes two years. So give thanks to Me, and to your parents. To Me is the destination.
But if they pressure you to associate with Me what you have no knowledge of, do not obey them. But keep them company in this life, in kindness, and follow the path of him who turns to Me. Then to Me is your return, and I will inform you of what you used to do.
“O, my son. Even if it were the weight of a mustard seed, in a rock, or in the skies, or on earth, Allah will bring it to light. Allah is Kind and Expert.
O, my son. Perform the prayer, advocate righteousness, forbid evil, and be patient over what has befallen you. This is a course worthy of resolve.
And do not treat people with arrogance, nor walk proudly on earth. Allah does not love the arrogant showoffs.
And moderate your stride, and lower your voice. The most repulsive of voices is the donkey’s voice.”
Do you not see how Allah placed at your service everything in the heavens and the earth? How He showered you with His blessings, both outward and inward? Yet among the people is he who argues about Allah without knowledge, without guidance, and without an enlightening Scripture.
And when it is said to them, “Follow what Allah revealed,” they say, “Rather, we follow what we found our parents following.” Even if Satan is calling them to the suffering of the Blaze?
Whoever submits himself fully to Allah, and is a doer of good, has grasped the most trustworthy handle. And with Allah rests the outcome of events.
Whoever disbelieves—let not his disbelief sadden you. To Us is their return, then We will inform them of what they did. Allah knows what is within the hearts.
We give them a little comfort; then We compel them to a harsh torment.
And if you ask them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They will say, “Allah.” Say, “Praise be to Allah.” But most of them do not know.
To Allah belongs everything in the heavens and on earth. Allah is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
If all the trees on earth were pens, filled by the ocean, with seven more oceans besides: Allah’s Words would not run out. Allah is Majestic and Wise.
Your creation and your resurrection are only as a single soul. Allah is Hearing and Seeing.
Have you not seen how Allah merges the night into the day, and merges the day into the night? And that He subjected the sun and the moon, each orbiting for a stated term? And that Allah is Cognizant of everything you do?
That is because Allah is the Truth, and what they call upon besides Him is falsehood; and Allah is the Superior, the Great.
Have you not seen how the ships sail through the sea, by the grace of Allah, to show you of His wonders? In this are signs for every patient, thankful person.
And when waves, like canopies, cover them, they call upon Allah, sincere in their devotion to Him. But when He delivers them safely to land, some of them waver. None denies Our revelations except the ungrateful traitor.
O, people! Be conscious of your Lord, and beware of a Day when no parent can avail his child, nor can a child avail his parent, in anything. The promise of Allah is true. So let not this life deceive you, and let not the Deceiver deceive you about Allah.
With Allah rests knowledge of the Hour. He sends down the rain, and He knows what the wombs contain. No soul knows what it will earn tomorrow, and no soul knows in what land it will die. Allah is All-Knowing, Well-Informed.
Alif. Lam. Meem.
The revelation of the Book, in which there is no doubt, is from the Lord of the Universe.
Or do they say, “He made it up.” In fact, it is the Truth from your Lord, to warn a people who received no warner before you, so they may be guided.
Allah is He Who created the heavens and the earth and everything between them in six stages, then settled on the throne. Apart from Him, you have neither protector nor intercessor. Will you not reflect?
He conducts every affair from the heavens to the earth. Then it ascends to Him on a Day whose duration is a thousand years by your counting.
That is the Knower of the Invisible and the Visible, the Powerful, the Merciful.
He who perfected everything He created; and originated the creation of the human being from clay.
Then He made his reproduction from an extract of a common fluid.
Then He proportioned him, and He breathed into him of His Spirit. Then He gave you the hearing, and the eyesight, and the brains—but rarely do you give thanks.
And they say, “When we are lost into the earth, will we be in a new creation?” In fact, they are in denial of the meeting with their Lord.
Say, “The angel of death put in charge of you will retrieve you. Then to your Lord, you will be returned.”
If only you could see the guilty, bowing their heads before their Lord: “Our Lord, we have seen, and we have heard, so send us back, and we will act righteously; we are now convinced.”
Had We willed, We could have given every soul its guidance. But the declaration from Me will come true: “I will fill Hell with jinn and humans, all together.”
So taste, because you ignored the meeting of this Day of yours. We will ignore you. And taste the eternal suffering for what you used to do.
They believe in Our communications, those who, when reminded of them, fall down in prostration, and glorify their Lord with praise, and they are not proud.
Their sides shun their beds, as they pray to their Lord, out of reverence and hope; and from Our provisions to them, they give.
No soul knows what eye’s delight is kept hidden for it—a reward for what they used to do.
Is someone who is faithful like someone who is sinful? They are not equal.
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds: for them are the Gardens of Shelter—hospitality for what they used to do.
But as for those who were disobedient: their housing is the Fire. Whenever they try to escape from it, they will be forced back into it, and it will be said to them, “Taste the suffering of the Fire which you used to deny.”
We will make them taste the lesser torment, prior to the greater torment, so that they may return.
And who is more unjust than he, who, when reminded of his Lord’s revelations, turns away from them? We will wreak vengeance upon the guilty.
We gave Moses the Book—so be in no doubt regarding His encounter—and We made it a guide for the Children of Israel.
And We appointed leaders from among them, who guided by Our command, as long as they persevered and were certain of Our communications.
Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding their disagreements.
Does it not serve as guidance for them, how many generations We destroyed before them, in whose dwellings they walk? Surely in this are signs. Do they not listen?
Do they not see how We conduct the water to dry land, and with it, We produce vegetation, from which their livestock eat, and themselves? Do they not see?
And they say, “When is this victory—if you are truthful?”
Say, “On the day of victory, faith will not benefit those who disbelieved; nor will they be granted amnesty.”
So turn away from them, and wait. They too are waiting.
O Prophet! Reverence Allah, and do not obey the unbelievers and the hypocrites. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
And follow what is revealed to you from your Lord. Allah is aware of what you do.
And put your trust in Allah. Allah is enough as a trustee.
Allah did not place two hearts inside any man's body. Nor did He make your wives whom you equate with your mothers, your actual mothers. Nor did He make your adopted children, your actual children. These are your words coming out of your mouths. Allah speaks the truth, and He guides upon the path.
Call them after their fathers; that is more equitable before Allah. But if you do not know their fathers, then your brethren in faith and your friends. There is no blame on you if you make a mistake in it, barring what your hearts intent. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
The Prophet is more caring of the believers than they are of themselves, and his wives are mothers to them. And family relations are closer to one another, according to the Book of Allah, than the believers and the emigrants. Although you should act rightly towards your friends. This is inscribed in the Book.
Recall that We received a pledge from the prophets, and from you, and from Noah, and Abraham, and Moses, and Jesus son of Mary. And We received from them a firm commitment.
So that the truthful may be asked about their truthfulness. He has prepared for the disbelievers a painful punishment.
O you who believe! Remember Allah’s blessings upon you, when forces came against you, and We sent against them a wind and forces you could not see. Allah is Observant of what you do.
When they came at you, from above you, and from beneath you; and the eyes became dazed, and the hearts reached the throats, and you harbored doubts about Allah.
There and then the believers were tested, and they were shaken most severely.
And When the hypocrites and the sick at heart said, “Allah and His Messenger promised us nothing but delusion.”
And when a group of them said, “O people of Yathrib, you cannot make a stand, so retreat.” And a group of them asked permission from the Prophet, saying, “Our homes are unprotected,” although they were not unprotected. They only intended to flee.
Had it been invaded from its sides, and they were asked to dissent, they would have done so with little hesitation.
Although they had already promised Allah not to turn their backs. A promise to Allah is a responsibility.
Say, “Fleeing will not benefit you if you flee from death or killing. Even then, you will be given only brief enjoyment.”
Say, “Who is it who will shield you from Allah, if He intends adversity for you, or intends mercy for you?” Besides Allah, they will find for themselves neither friend nor helper.
Allah knows the hinderers among you, and those who say to their brethren, “Come and join us.” Hardly do they mobilize for battle.
They do not care about you. And when fear approaches, you see them staring at you—their eyes rolling—like someone fainting at death. Then, when fear subsides, they whip you with sharp tongues, resenting you any good. These have never believed, so Allah has nullified their works—and that is easy for Allah.
They assumed that the Confederates have not withdrawn. But were the Confederates to advance, they would wish they were in the desert with the Bedouins, inquiring about your news. And if they were among you, they would not fight, except a little.
You have in the Messenger of Allah an excellent example, for those who hope for Allah and the Last Day and remember Allah much.
And when the believers saw the confederates, they said, “This is what Allah and His Messenger have promised us, and Allah and His messenger have told the truth.” And it only increased them in faith and submission.
Among the believers are men true to their pledge before Allah. Some of them have fulfilled their vows, and some are still waiting, and never wavering.
So that Allah may reward the truthful for their truthfulness, and punish the hypocrites, if He wills, or accept their repentance. Allah is surely Forgiving and Merciful.
And Allah drove back the unbelievers in their rage, and they gained no advantage. Allah thus spared the believers combat. Allah is Strong, Mighty.
And He brought the People of the Scripture who supported them down from their strongholds, and He threw horror in their hearts. Some of them you killed, and others you took captive.
And He made you inherit their land, and their homes, and their wealth, and a region you never stepped on. And Allah is capable of everything.
O Prophet! Say to your wives, “If you desire the worldly life and its luxury, then come: I will compensate you, and release you kindly.
But if you desire Allah and His Messenger, and the Home of the Hereafter: then Allah has prepared for the righteous among you a magnificent compensation.”
O wives of the Prophet! Whoever among you commits a proven indecency, her punishment will be doubled, and that is easy for Allah.
And whoever among you is devoutly obedient to Allah and His Messenger, and acts righteously: We will give her her reward twice over, and We have prepared for her a generous provision.
O wives of the Prophet! You are not like any other women: if you observe piety. So do not speak too softly, lest the sick at heart lusts after you. But speak in an appropriate manner.
And settle in your homes; and do not display your beauty, as in the former days of ignorance. And perform the prayer, and give charity regularly, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah intends to remove all impurity from you, O People of the Household, and to purify you thoroughly.
And remember what is recited in your homes from Allah's revelations and wisdom. Allah is Nice and Informed.
Submitting men and submitting women, believing men and believing women, devout men and devout women, truthful men and truthful women, patient men and patient women, humble men and humble women, charitable men and charitable women, men who fast and women who fast, men who guard their privates and women who guard, men who remember Allah frequently and women who remember—Allah has prepared for them forgiveness and a great reward.
It is not for any believer, man or woman, when Allah and His Messenger have decided on an issue, to have the liberty of choice in their decision. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger has gone far astray.
When you said to him, whom Allah has blessed, and you have favored, “Keep your wife to yourself, and fear Allah.” But you hid within yourself what Allah was to disclose. And you feared the people, but it was Allah you were supposed to fear. Then, when Zaid ended his relationship with her, We gave her to you in marriage, so that there may be no restriction for believers regarding the wives of their adopted sons—when their relationship has ended. The command of Allah was fulfilled.
There is no restriction on the Prophet regarding what Allah has mandated for him. That is Allah’s pattern among those who passed before. The command of Allah is a mandated destiny.
Those who deliver the messages of Allah, and fear Him, and fear no one except Allah. Allah suffices as a Reckoner.
Muhammad is not the father of any of your men, but he is Allah’s Messenger, and the Seal of the prophets. And Allah knows everything.
O you who believe! Remember Allah with frequent remembrance.
And glorify Him morning and evening.
It is He who reaches out to you, and His angels, to bring you out of darkness into light. He is Ever-Merciful towards the believers.
Their greeting on the Day they meet Him is, “Peace,” and He has prepared for them a generous reward.
O prophet! We sent you as a witness, and a deliverer of good news, and a warner.
And a caller towards Allah, by His permission, and an illuminating beacon.
And give good news to the believers that they will have from Allah a great favor.
And do not obey the disbelievers and the hypocrites, and ignore their annoyances, and rely on Allah. Allah is a sufficient Protector.
O you who believe! When you marry believing women, but then divorce them before you have touched them, there is no waiting period for you to observe regarding them—but compensate them, and release them in a graceful manner.
O Prophet! We have made lawful for you your wives to whom you have given their compensations, and those you already have, as granted to you by Allah, and the daughters of your paternal uncle, and the daughters of your paternal aunts, and the daughters of your maternal uncle, and the daughters of your maternal aunts who migrated with you, and a believing woman who offered herself to the Prophet, if the Prophet desires to marry her, exclusively for you, and not for the believers. We also know what We mandated to them regarding their wives and those their right hands possess. This is to spare you any difficulty. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
You may put off any of them you wish, and invite any of them you wish. There is no blame on you if you desire any of those you had set aside. This is more proper, so that they will be comforted, and not be saddened, and be content with what you have given each of them. Allah knows what is within your hearts. And Allah is Knowledgeable and Patient.
Beyond that, no other women are permissible for you, nor can you exchange them for other wives, even if you admire their beauty, except those you already have. Allah is Watchful over everything.
O you who believe! Do not enter the Prophet's homes for a meal, unless you are invited, and do not wait for its preparation. But if you are invited, then enter. And when you have eaten, then disperse, without lingering for conversation. This irritates the Prophet, and he shies away from you, but Allah does not shy away from the truth. And when you ask his wives for something, ask them from behind a screen; that is purer for your hearts and their hearts. You must never offend Allah’s Messenger, nor marry his wives after him, ever, for that would be an enormity with Allah.
Whether you disclose a thing, or you hide it, Allah is Knower of all things.
There is no blame on them concerning their fathers, or their sons, or their brothers, or their brothers’ sons, or their sisters’ sons, or their women, or their servants. But they should remain conscious of Allah. Allah is Witness over everything.
Allah and His angels send blessings to the Prophet. O you who believe, call for blessings on him, and for greetings of peace.
Those who insult Allah and His Messenger: Allah curses them in this life and in the Hereafter, and He has prepared for them a humiliating punishment.
Those who harm believing men and believing women, for acts they did not commit, bear the burden of perjury and blatant sin.
O Prophet! Tell your wives, and your daughters, and the believers’ women to lengthen their garments. That is more proper, so they will be recognized and not be harassed. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
If the hypocrites, and the sick at heart, and the rumormongers in Medina, do not desist, We will incite you against them, and then they will not be your neighbors there much longer.
They are cursed. Wherever they are found, they should be captured and killed outright.
Such has been Allah’s precedent with those who have gone before. You will find no change in Allah’s system.
The people ask you about the Hour. Say, “Knowledge thereof rests with Allah. But you never know, perhaps the Hour is near.”
Allah has cursed the unbelievers and has prepared for them a Blaze.
To stay in there forever—they will find no protector or helper.
On the Day when their faces are flipped in the Fire, they will say, “If only we had obeyed Allah, and obeyed the Messenger.”
And they will say, “Our Lord, we have obeyed our superiors and our dignitaries, but they led us away from the way.
Our Lord, give them double the punishment, and curse them with a great curse.”
O you who believe! Do not be like those who slandered Moses, but Allah cleared him of what they said. He was distinguished with Allah.
O you who believe! Be conscious of Allah, and speak in a straightforward manner.
He will rectify your conduct for you, and He will forgive you your sins. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger has achieved great success.
We offered the Trust to the heavens and the earth and the mountains. But they refused to undertake it, and were apprehensive of it. Yet the human being undertook it. He has always been unfair and ignorant.
So that Allah may punish the hypocritical men and the hypocritical women, and the idolatrous men and the idolatrous women, and so that Allah may relent towards the believing men and the believing women. Allah is Ever-Forgiving, Most-Merciful.
Praise be to Allah, to Whom belongs everything in the heavens and the earth. And His is the praise in the Hereafter. And He is the Wise, the Expert.
He knows what penetrates into the earth, and what comes out of it, and what descends from the sky, and what ascends to it. He is the Merciful, the Forgiving.
Those who disbelieve say, “The Hour will not come upon us.” Say, “Yes, by my Lord, it will come upon you. The Knower of the unseen.” Not an atom’s weight evades Him in the heavens or on earth, nor smaller than that, nor larger, but is in a clear Record.
So that He may reward those who believe and do good deeds. These will have forgiveness and a generous provision.
As for those who strive against Our revelations, trying to undermine them—for them is a punishment of a painful plague.
Those gifted with knowledge see that what was revealed to you from your Lord is the truth; and it guides to the path of the Majestic, the Praiseworthy.
Those who disbelieved said, “Shall we show you a man, who will inform you, that once torn into shreds, you will be in a new creation?
Did he invent a lie about Allah, or is he insane?” In fact, those who do not believe in the Hereafter are in torment and extensive error.
Have they not looked at what is ahead of them and what is behind them, of the sky and the earth? If We willed, We could make the ground cave in beneath them, or make pieces of the sky fall on them. In this is a sign for every devout worshiper.
We bestowed upon David favor from Us: “O mountains! Echo his hymns. And the birds.” And We softened iron for him.
“Make coats of armor. And measure the links well. And work righteousness. I am Observant of everything you do.”
And for Solomon, the wind—its outward journey was one month, and its return journey was one month. And We made a spring of tar flow for him. And there were sprites that worked of him, by the leave of his Lord. But whoever of them deviated from Our command, We made him taste of the punishment of the Inferno.
They made for him whatever he desired: sanctuaries, statues, basins like reservoirs, and heavy cauldrons. “O House of David, work with appreciation,” but a few of My servants are thankful.
Then, when We decreed death for him, nothing indicated his death to them except an earthworm eating at his staff. And when he collapsed, it became clear to the sprites: that had they known the unseen, they would not have remained in the humiliating punishment.
In Sheba’s homeland, there was a sign for them: two gardens, on the right, and on the left. “Eat of your Lord’s provision, and give thanks to Him.” A good land, and a forgiving Lord.
But they turned away. So We unleashed against them the flood of the dam, and We substituted their two gardens with two gardens of bitter fruits, fruitless bushes, and a few thorny shrubs.
We thus penalized them for their ingratitude. Would We penalize any except the ungrateful?
And We placed between them and the towns that We blessed prominent towns, and We made the travel between them easy. “Travel between them by night and day, safely.”
But they said, “Our Lord, lengthen the distances of our journeys.” They wronged themselves. So We made them history, and We scattered them in every direction. In this are lessons for every patient, appreciative person.
Iblis was correct in his assessment of them. They followed him, except for a group among the believers.
He has no authority over them. But We wanted to know who believes in the Hereafter, and who is in doubt about it. Your Lord is Guardian over all things.
Say, “Call upon those you claim besides Allah. They do not possess an atom's weight in the heavens or the earth, nor do they possess any partnership in them. And He has no backers from among them.”
Intercession with Him is of no benefit, except for someone He has permitted. Until, when fear has subsided from their hearts, they will say, “What did your Lord say?” They will say, “The truth, and He is the High, the Great.”
Say, “Who provides for you from the heavens and the earth?” Say, “Allah. And either you, or we, are upon guidance, or in evident error.”
Say, “You will not be asked about our misdeeds, nor will we be asked about what you do.”
Say, “Our Lord will bring us together. Then He will judge between us equitably. He is the All-Knowing Arbiter.”
Say, “Show me those you have attached to Him as associates. No indeed! In fact, He is Allah, the Powerful and the Wise.”
We did not send you, except as a deliverer of good news and a warner—to all of humanity. But most people do not know.
And they say, “When will this promise come true—if you are truthful?”
Say, “You have an appointment for a Day which you cannot postpone by one hour, nor bring forward.”
Those who disbelieve say, “We will never believe in this Quran, nor in what came before it.” If only you could see the wrongdoers, captive before their Lord, throwing back allegations at one another. Those who were oppressed will say to those who were arrogant, “Were it not for you, we would have been believers.”
Those who were arrogant will say to those who were oppressed, “Was it us who turned you away from guidance when it came to you? No indeed, you yourselves were guilty.”
And those who were oppressed will say to those who were arrogant, “It was your scheming by night and by day, ordering us to reject Allah, and to set up rivals to Him.” But they will hide their remorse when they see the punishment. We will put yokes around the necks of those who disbelieved. Will they be repaid except for what they used to do?
We sent no warner to any town without its affluent saying, “We reject what you are sent with.”
And they say, “We have more wealth and children, and we will not be punished.”
Say, “My Lord spreads out His bounty to whom He wills, or restricts it. But most people do not know.”
It is neither your wealth nor your children that bring you closer to Us, but those who believe and work righteousness—these will have a double reward for what they did, and they will be secure in lofty chambers.
As for those who endeavor to undermine Our revelations—these will be summoned to the punishment.
Say, “My Lord gives abundantly to whom He wills of His servants—or withholds it. Whatever you spend, He will replace it; and He is the Best of providers.”
On the Day when He gathers them all together, then say to the angels, “Was it you these used to worship?”
They will say, “Be You glorified; You are our Master, not them. In fact, they used to worship the jinn, and most of them had faith in them.”
“So today, none of you has the power to benefit or harm the other.” And We will say to those who did wrong, “Taste the agony of the Fire, which you used to deny.”
And when Our enlightening Verses are recited to them, they say, “This is nothing but a man who wants to prevent you from what your ancestors worshiped.” And they say, “This is nothing but a fabricated lie.” And those who disbelieve say of the Truth when it has come to them, “This is nothing but plain magic.”
Although We had never given them any scriptures to study, nor did We ever send them a warner before you.
Those before them also denied. And they have not attained even one-tenth of what We had given them. They denied My messengers, so how was My rejection?
Say, “I offer you a single advice: devote yourselves to Allah, in pairs, or individually. Then think. Your friend is not crazy. He is just a warner to you, before the advent of severe punishment.”
Say, “Had I ever asked you for a reward, it is yours. My reward is only from Allah, and He is Witness over all things.”
Say, “My Lord projects the truth, Knower of the Unseen.”
Say, “The Truth has come; while falsehood can neither originate, nor regenerate.”
Say, “If I go astray, I go astray only to my own loss. And if I am guided, it is through what my Lord inspires me. He is Hearing and Near.”
And if only you could see, when they will be horrified, and there is no escape, and they are seized from a nearby place.
And they say, “We have believed in it.” But how can they attain it from a distant place?
They have disbelieved it in the past. And they made allegations from a distant place.
And a barrier will be placed between them and what they desire, as was done with their counterparts before. They are confounded by doubt.
Praise be to Allah, Programmer of the heavens and the earth, Maker of the angels: messengers with wings—double, triple, and quadruple. He adds to creation as He wills. Allah is Capable of everything.
Whatever mercy Allah unfolds for the people, none can withhold it. And whatsoever He withholds, none can release it thereafter. He is the Exalted in Power, Full of Wisdom.
O, people! Remember Allah’s Blessing upon you. Is there a creator other than Allah who provides for you from heaven and earth? There is no god except He. So how do you deviate?
If they reject you: messengers before you were rejected. To Allah, all matters are returned.
O, people! The promise of Allah is true. So let not the lowly life seduce you, nor let the Deceiver deceive you regarding Allah.
Satan is an enemy to you, so take him as an enemy. He only calls his gang to be among the inmates of the Inferno.
Those who disbelieve will suffer a harsh punishment, but those who believe and do righteous deeds will have forgiveness and a great reward.
What of him whose evil deed was made attractive to him, and so he regards it as good? Allah leads astray whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. So do not waste yourself sorrowing over them. Allah knows what they do.
Allah is He who sends the winds, which agitate clouds, which We drive to a dead land, and thereby revive the ground after it had died. Likewise is the Resurrection.
Whoever desires honor—all honor belongs to Allah. To Him ascends speech that is pure, and He elevates righteous conduct. But as for those who plot evil, a terrible punishment awaits them, and the planning of these will fail.
Allah created you from dust, then from a small drop, then He made you pairs. No female conceives, or delivers, except with His knowledge. And no living thing advances in years, or its life is shortened, but is in a Record. That is certainly easy for Allah.
The two bodies of water are not alike: one is fresh, palatable, and pleasant to drink, while the other is salty and bitter. Yet from each, you eat tender meat, and you extract ornaments that you wear. And you see the ships plowing through them, so that you may seek of His bounty, and so that you may give thanks.
He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. And He regulated the sun and the moon, each orbiting for an appointed term. That is Allah, your Lord; to Him belongs sovereignty. As for those you invoke besides Him: they do not possess a speck.
If you pray to them, they cannot hear your prayer. And if they were to hear, they could not respond to you. And on the Day of Resurrection, they will reject your partnership. None can inform you like the Expert.
O, people! It is you who stand in need of Allah; while Allah is the Rich, the Praiseworthy.
If He wills, He can do away with you, and produce a new creation.
And that is not difficult for Allah.
No burdened soul can bear the burdens of another. Even if one weighted down calls for help with its burden, none of it will be lifted, even by a close relative. You are to warn those who fear their Lord inwardly and perform the prayer. Whoever purifies himself, purifies himself for his own good. To Allah is the final return.
Not equal are the blind and the seeing.
Nor are darkness and light.
Nor are shade and torrid heat.
Nor are equal the living and the dead. Allah makes whom He will hear, but you cannot make those in the graves hear.
You are only a warner.
We sent you with the truth: a deliverer of good news, and a warner. There is no community, but a warner has passed through it.
If they deny you, those before them also denied. Their messengers came to them with clear proofs, divine Books, and the Enlightening Scripture.
Then I seized those who disbelieved—so how was My rejection?
Have you not considered that Allah sends down water from the sky? With it, We produce fruits of diverse colors. And in the mountains are streaks of white and red—of diverse hues—and pitch-black.
Likewise: human beings, animals, and livestock are of various colors. From among His worshipers, the learned fear Allah. Allah is Almighty, Oft-Forgiving.
Those who read Allah’s book, and perform the prayer, and donate from what We have provided for them—secretly and publicly—expect a trade that will not fail.
So that He may pay them their dues in full, and increase them from His grace. He is Forgiving, Most Appreciative.
What We inspired in you, of the Book, is the truth—confirming what came before it. Allah is Well-Informed of His worshipers, All-Seeing.
Then We passed the Book to those of Our servants whom We selected. Some of them wrong their souls, and some follow a middle course, and some are foremost in good deeds, by Allah’s leave—that is the greatest favor.
The Gardens of Eden, which they will enter. They will be adorned therein with bracelets of gold and pearls, and their clothing therein will be silk.
And they will say, “Praise be to Allah, Who has lifted all sorrow from us. Our Lord is Most Forgiving, Most Appreciative.
He Who settled us in the Home of Permanence, by His grace: where boredom will not touch us, and fatigue will not afflict us.”
As for those who disbelieve: for them is the Fire of Hell, where they will never be finished off and die, nor will its punishment be reduced for them. Thus We repay every disbeliever.
And they will scream in it, “Our Lord, let us out, and we will act righteously, differently from the way we used to act.” Did We not give you a life long enough, in which anyone who wanted to understand would have understood? And the warner did come to you. So taste. The wrongdoers have no helper.
Allah is the Knower of the future of the heavens and the earth. He knows what the hearts contain.
It is He Who made you successors on earth. Whoever disbelieves, his disbelief will recoil upon him. The disbelief of the disbelievers adds only to their Lord's disfavor of them. The disbelief of the disbelievers adds only to their loss.
Say, “Have you considered those partners of yours that you call upon instead of Allah? Show me what they have created on earth. Or do they have a partnership in the heavens?” Or did we give them a book whose clear teachings they follow? In fact, the wrongdoers promise one another nothing but delusion.
Allah keeps the heavens and the earth from falling apart. And were they to fall apart, there is none to hold them together except He. He is Clement, Forgiving.
And they swore by Allah, with their most solemn oaths, that if a warner came to them, they would be more guided than any of the communities. Yet when a warner came to them, it only increased them in aversion.
Priding themselves on earth, and scheming evil. But evil scheming overwhelms none but its authors. Do they expect anything but the precedent of those of old? You will find no change in Allah’s practice, and you will find no deviation from Allah’s practice.
Have they not journeyed on earth, and observed the fate of those before them? They were far superior to them in might. And nothing in the heavens or on earth can thwart Allah. He is Knowledgeable and Capable.
If Allah were to punish people for what they have earned, He would not leave a single creature on its surface. But He postpones them until a stated time. Then, when their time has arrived—Allah is Observant of His servants.
Ya. Seen.
By the Wise Quran.
You are one of the messengers.
On a straight path.
The revelation of the Almighty, the Merciful.
To warn a people whose ancestors were not warned, so they are unaware.
The word has been justified against most of them—for they do not believe.
We placed shackles upon their necks, up to their chins, so they are forced up.
And We placed a barrier in front of them, and a barrier behind them, and We enshrouded them; so they cannot see.
And it is the same for them, whether you warn them, or do not warn them—they will not believe.
You only warn whoever follows the Message and fears the Compassionate unseen. So give him the good news of forgiveness and a generous reward.
It is We who give life to the dead. And We write what they have forwarded, and their traces. We keep track of all things in a Clear Registry.
And give them the example of the inhabitants of the town, when the messengers came to it.
We sent to them two messengers, but they denied both, so We reinforced them with a third. They said, “We are sent to you.”
They said, “You are only humans like us, and the Compassionate did not reveal anything. You are only lying.”
They said, “Our Lord knows that we are sent to you.
And our only duty is clear delivery.”
They said, “We see a bad omen in you. If you do not give up, we will stone you, and a painful punishment from us will befall you.”
They said, “Your bad omen is within yourselves. Is it because you were reminded? In fact, you are excessive people.”
And a man came running from the outskirts of the city. He said, “O my people, follow the messengers.
Follow those who ask of you no payment—and are themselves guided.
“And why should I not worship Him Who originated me, and to Whom you will be returned?
Shall I take gods apart from Him? If the Beneficent intends harm for me, their intercession would not avail me at all, nor would they save me.
In that case, I would be completely lost.
I have believed in your Lord, so listen to me.”
It was said, “Enter Paradise.” He said, “If only my people knew.
How my Lord has forgiven me, and made me of the honored.”
After him, We sent down no hosts from heaven against his people, nor would We send down.
It was just a single Shout, and they were extinguished.
Alas for the servants! Never did a messenger come to them, but they ridiculed him.
Have they not considered how many generations We destroyed before them? How none of them returned to them?
All of them, every single one of them, will be summoned before Us.
And there is a sign for them in the dead earth: We give it life, and We produce from it grains from which they eat.
And We placed in it gardens of date-palms and grapevines, and We caused springs to gush out of it.
So that they may eat of its fruit—although their hands did not make it. Will they not be thankful?
Glory be to He, who created all the pairs, of whatever the earth grows, and of themselves, and of what they do not know.
Another sign for them is the night: We strip the day from it—and they are in darkness.
And the sun runs its course towards its destined point. That is the design of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
And the moon: We have disposed it in phases—until it returns like the old twig.
The sun is not to overtake the moon, nor is the night to outpace the day. Each glides in an orbit.
Another sign for them is that We carried their ancestors in the loaded Ark.
And We created for them the like of it, in which they ride.
If We willed, We could drown them—with no screaming to be heard from them, nor will they be saved.
Except by mercy from Us, and enjoyment for a while.
Yet when it is said to them, “Beware of what is ahead of you, and what is behind you, so you may receive mercy .”
Never came to them a sign of their Lord’s signs, but they turned away from it.
And when it is said to them, “Donate from what Allah has provided for you,” those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “Should we feed someone whom Allah could have fed if He wanted to? You are clearly astray.”
And they say, “When will this promise come about—if you are truthful?”
All they can expect is a single blast, which will seize them while they feud.
They will be unable to make a will. And they will not return to their families.
And the Trumpet will be blown: and at once, they will rush from the graves to their Lord.
They will say, “Woe to us! Who resurrected us from our resting-place?” This is what the Mercy-Giver had promised; the messengers have told the truth.”
It will be but a single Scream: and at once, they will all be arraigned before Us.
On that Day, no soul will be wronged in the least, and you will be rewarded only for what you used to do.
The inhabitants of Paradise, on that Day, will be happily engaged.
They and their spouses, in shades, reclining on couches.
There they will have fruits. They will have whatever they ask for.
Peace—a saying from a Most Merciful Lord.
But step aside today, you criminals.
Did I not covenant with you, O Children of Adam, that you shall not worship Satan? That he is your sworn enemy?
And that you shall worship Me? This is a straight path.
He has misled great multitudes of you. Did you not reason?
This is Gehenna that you were promised.
Roast in it today, for having disbelieved.
On that Day, We will seal their mouths, and their hands will speak to Us, and their feet will testify to what they used to earn.
And had We willed, We would have blotted out their eyes. Then they would race to the path; yet how would they see?
And had We willed, We would have transformed them in their place. Then they could neither advance, nor go back.
Whomever We give long life, We decline his development. Do they not understand?
We did not teach him poetry, nor is it suitable for him. It is only a reminder and a Clear Quran.
To warn whoever is alive, and to prove the Word against the faithless.
Have they not considered that We created for them, of Our Handiwork, livestock that they own?
And We subdued them for them. Some of them they ride, and some they eat.
And they have in them other benefits—and beverages. Will they not give thanks?
Yet they have taken to themselves gods other than Allah, that perhaps they may be helped.
They cannot help them, although they are arrayed as troops for them.
So do not let their words sadden you. We know what they conceal, and what they disclose.
Does the human being not consider that We created him from a drop? Yet he becomes a fierce adversary.
And he produces arguments against Us, and he forgets his own creation. He says, “Who will revive the bones when they have decayed?”
Say, “He who initiated them in the first instance will revive them. And He knows every creation.”
He who produced for you fuel from the green trees, with which you kindle fire.
Is not He who created the heavens and the earth able to create the like of them? Certainly. He is the All-Knowing Creator.
His command, when He wills something, is to say to it, “Be,” and it comes to be.
So glory be to Him, in whose hand is the dominion of all things, and to Him, you will be returned.
By the aligners aligning.
And the drivers driving.
And the reciters of the Reminder.
Your God is certainly One.
Lord of the heavens and the earth, and everything between them, and Lord of the Easts.
We have decorated the lower heaven with the beauty of the planets.
And protection from every defiant devil.
They cannot eavesdrop on the Supernal Elite, for they get bombarded from every side.
Repelled—they will have a lingering torment.
Except for him who snatches a glimpse—he will be pursued by a piercing flare.
Inquire of them, “Are they more difficult to create, or those We created?” We created them from sticky clay.
But you wonder, and they ridicule.
And when reminded, they pay no attention.
And when they see a sign, they ridicule.
And they say, “This is nothing but obvious magic.
When we have died and become dust and bones, are we to be resurrected?
And our ancestors of old?”
Say, “Yes indeed, and you will be subdued.”
It will be a single nudge, and they will be staring.
And they will say, “Woe to us, this is Judgement Day.”
“This is the Day of Separation that you used to deny.
Gather those who did wrong, and their types, and what they used to worship.
Besides Allah, and lead them to the path of Hell.
And stop them. They are to be questioned.”
What is the matter with you? Why do you not help one another?
In fact, on that Day, they will be submissive.
They will turn to one another, questioning one another.
They will say, “You used to approach us from the right.”
They will say, “You yourselves were not believers.
We had no authority over you. You yourselves were oppressive people.
So the Word of our Lord is justified against us. We are tasting it.
We seduced you. We were seducers.”
On that Day, they will share in the punishment.
Thus We deal with the guilty.
When it was said to them, “There is no god except Allah,” they became arrogant.
And said, “Are we to give up our gods for a mad poet?”
In fact, he came with the truth, and he confirmed the messengers.
Most certainly, you will taste the painful punishment.
And you will be repaid only for what you used to do.
Not so for Allah’s chosen worshipers.
For them is a known provision.
Fruits—and they will be honored.
In the Gardens of Bliss.
On furnishings, facing one another.
A cup from a flowing spring will be circulated among them.
White and delicious to the drinkers.
Never polluted—and never intoxicating.
With them will be maidens of modest gaze with lustrous eyes.
As if they were guarded pearls.
And they will approach one another, questioning.
One of them will say, “I used to have a close friend.
Who used to say, “Are you among those who believe?
That after we die and become dust and bones, we will be called to account?”
He will say, “Will you have a look?”
So he will look, and He will see him in the midst of Hellfire.
He will say, “By Allah, you almost ruined me.
Were it not for my Lord’s favor, I would have been among the arraigned.”
“We will not die.
Except for our first death, and we will not be punished.”
This is the great victory.
For the like of this let the workers work.
Is this a better hospitality, or the Tree of Bitterness?
We made it an ordeal for the unjust.
It is a tree that grows from the depths of Hellfire.
Its sprouts are like the devils’ heads.
They will eat from it, and fill their bellies with it.
Then, on top of it, they will have a boiling brew.
Then their return will be to the Blaze.
They had found their parents astray.
And they rushed along in their footsteps.
And most of the ancients before them went astray.
Although We had sent warners among them.
So observe the final fate of those who were warned.
Not so for Allah’s devoted servants.
And Noah called out to Us, and We are the Best of responders.
And We saved him and his family from the great calamity.
And We made his descendants the survivors.
And We left mention of him among later generations.
Peace be upon Noah, among all people.
Thus We reward the good-doers.
He was one of Our believing servants.
Then We drowned the others.
And of his kind was Abraham.
When he came to his Lord with a sound heart.
When he said to his father and his people, “What are you worshiping?
Is it falsified gods, instead of Allah, that you want?
What is your opinion about the Lord of the Worlds?”
Then he took a glance at the stars.
And said, “I am sick.”
But they turned their backs on him, and went away.
Then he turned to their gods, and said, “Will you not eat?
What is wrong with you, that you do not speak?”
Then he turned on them, striking with the right hand.
And they came to him rushing.
He said, “Do you worship what you carve?
When it is Allah Who created you, and what you manufacture?”
They said, “Construct a pyre for him, and throw him into the furnace.”
They desired to scheme against him, so We made them the lowest.
And he said, “I am going to my Lord—He will guide me.”
“My Lord, grant me one of the righteous.”
So We gave him the good news of a gentle boy.
Then, when he became old enough to work with him, he said, “O My son, I see in a dream that I am slaughtering you; so see what you think.” He said, “O my father, do as you are commanded; you will find me, Allah willing, patient.”
Then, when they submitted, and he put his forehead down.
We called to him, “O Abraham!
You have fulfilled the vision.” Thus We reward the doers of good.
That was clearly an obvious test.
And We redeemed him with a great sacrifice.
And We left with him for later generations.
Peace be upon Abraham.
Thus We reward the good-doers.
He was one of Our believing servants.
And We gave him the good news of Isaac, a prophet from the righteous.
And We blessed him, and Isaac. And among their descendants are good-doers. And others who clearly wrong themselves.
And We have favored Moses and Aaron.
And We saved them and their people from the terrible disaster.
And We supported them, so they became the victors.
And We gave them the Clarifying Scripture.
And We guided them on the straight path.
And We left with them for later generations.
Peace be upon Moses and Aaron.
Thus We reward the righteous.
They were of Our believing servants.
Also, Elijah was one of the messengers.
He said to his people, “Do you not fear?
Do you call on Baal, and forsake the Best of creators?
Allah is your Lord, and the Lord of your forefathers.”
But they called him a liar, so they will be brought.
Not so for Allah’s chosen servants.
And We left with him for later generations.
Peace be upon the House of Elijah.
Thus We reward the virtuous.
He was one of Our faithful servants.
And Lot was one of the messengers.
When We saved him and his family, all together.
Except for an old woman, who was among the laggards.
Then We annihilated the others.
You pass by them in the morning.
And at night. Will you not understand?
And Jonah was one of the messengers.
When he fled to the overloaded ship.
He gambled and lost.
Then the whale swallowed him, and he was to blame.
Had he not been among those who praised.
He would have remained in its belly until the Day they are raised.
Then We threw him into the open, and he was worn out.
And We made a grout tree grow over him.
Then We sent him to a hundred thousand, or more.
And they believed, so We gave them enjoyment for a while.
Ask them, “Are the daughters for your Lord, and the sons for them?”
Or did We create the angels females, and they were witnesses?”
No indeed! It is of their perversions when they say.
“Allah has begotten.” They are certainly liars.
So He preferred girls over boys?
What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
Do you not reflect?
Or do you have some compelling proof?
Then bring your book, if you are truthful.
And they invented a relationship between Him and the jinn. But the jinns know that they will be summoned.
Allah be glorified, far above what they describe.
Not so for Allah’s sincere worshipers.
You and whatever you worship.
Cannot seduce away from Him.
Except for him who will roast in Hell.
“There is not one of us but has an assigned position.
And we are the arrangers.
And we are the glorifiers.”
Even though they used to say.
“Had we received advice from the ancients.
We would have been of Allah's faithful worshipers.”
But they rejected it, so they will soon know.
And Our word already went out to Our servants, the messengers.
That it is they who will be helped.
And Our forces will be the victors.
So turn away from them for a while.
And watch them—they will soon see.
Do they want Our punishment in a hurry?
When it descends on their courtyard, miserable will be the morning of those forewarned.
So turn away from them for a while.
And watch—they will soon see.
Glorified is your Lord—the Lord of Glory—above what they claim!
And peace be upon the Messengers.
And praise be to Allah, Lord of the Universes.
Saad. By the Quran, full of reminders.
Those who disbelieve are in arrogance and schism.
How many generations before them did We destroy? They cried out when it was too late to escape.
And they marvel that a warner from among them came to them. The disbelievers said, “This is a lying sorcerer.”
“Did he make the gods one God? This is something strange.”
And the notables among them announced: “Go on, and hold fast to your gods, this is something planned.
We never heard of this in the former faith. This is nothing but an invention.
Was the message sent down to him, out of all of us?” In fact, they are doubtful of My message. In fact, they have not yet tasted My punishment.
Or do they possess the treasuries of your Lord's mercy—the Majestic, the Giver?
Or do they possess the sovereignty of the heavens and the earth and what is between them? Then let them ascend by some means.
An army of confederates will be defeated there.
Before them, the people of Noah denied; as did Aad, and Pharaoh of the Stakes.
And Thamood, and the people of Lot, and the woods-dwellers: these are the parties.
None of them but denied the messengers, so My punishment was justified.
These can expect but a single blast, from which there is no recovery.
And they say, “Our Lord, advance for us our share, before the Day of Account.”
Be patient in the face of what they say, and mention Our servant David, the resourceful. He was obedient.
We committed the mountains to praise with him, in the evening and at sunrise.
And the birds, flocking together—all obedient to him.
And We strengthened his kingdom, and We gave him wisdom and decisive speech.
Has the story of the two disputants reached you, when they scaled the sanctuary?
When they entered upon David, he was startled by them. They said, “Do not fear. Two disputants: one of us has wronged the other, so judge between us fairly, and do not be biased, and guide us in the right way.”
“This brother of mine has ninety-nine ewes, and I have one ewe. Yet he said, ‘Place it under my care,’ and he pressured me with speech.”
He said, “He has wronged you by asking that your ewe be added to his ewes. And many partners wrong one another, except those who believe and do righteous deeds—but these are so few.” And David realized that We were testing him, so he sought forgiveness from his Lord, fell down kneeling, and repented.
So We forgave him that. And for him is nearness to Us—and a beautiful return.
“O David, We made you a steward over this land, so judge between the people with justice, and do not follow the desire, lest it diverts you from Allah’s path. Those who stray from Allah’s path will have a severe punishment, for having ignored the Day of Account.”
We did not create the heaven and the earth and everything between them in vain. That is the assumption of those who disbelieve—so woe to those who disbelieve because of the Fire.
Or shall We make those who believe and perform righteous deeds like those who work corruption on earth? Or shall We make the reverent like the shameless?
A blessed Book that We sent down to you, so that they may ponder its Verses, and so that the people of understanding may reflect.
And to David, We gave Solomon—what an excellent servant. He was penitent.
When the beautiful horses were paraded before him in the evening.
He said, “I have preferred the love of niceties over the remembrance of my Lord—until they disappeared behind the veil.
Bring them back to me.” And he began caressing their legs and necks.
And We tested Solomon, and We placed a body on his throne. Then he repented.
He said, “My Lord, forgive me, and grant me a kingdom never to be attained by anyone after me. You are the Giver.”
So We placed the wind at his service, blowing gently by his command, wherever he wanted.
And the devils—every builder and diver.
And others shackled in chains.
“This is Our gift. So give generously, or withhold, without an account.”
And for him is nearness to Us—and a beautiful resort.
And mention Our servant Job, when he called upon his Lord, “Satan has touched me with distress and suffering.”
“Stomp with your foot—this is cool water to wash with, and to drink.”
And We restored his family to him, and their like with them, as a mercy from Us, and a lesson for those who possess insight.
“Take with your hand a bundle, and strike with it, and do not break your oath.” We found him patient. What an excellent servant! He was repentant.
And mention Our servants Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob—endowed with ability and vision.
We distinguished them with a distinct quality: the remembrance of the Home.
To Us: they are among the chosen, the outstanding.
And mention Ishmael, Elisha, and Ezekiel: each is among the outstanding.
This is a reminder. The devout will have a good place of return.
The Gardens of Eternity, with the doors, opened for them.
Relaxing in them—and calling for abundant fruit and beverage.
And with them will be attendants with a modest gaze, of equal age.
This is what you are promised for the Day of Account.
This is Our bounty—inexhaustible.
All This. But the transgressors will have a miserable return.
Hell—in which they will roast—what a miserable place of return.
All this. Let them taste it—boiling and bitter cold.
And similar torments of diverse kinds.
“This is a crowd rushing headlong with you.” No welcome for them. They will be scorched by the Fire.
They will say, “But it is you. No welcome for you. You brought it upon us. What a miserable end.”
They will say, “Our Lord, whoever brought this upon us, give him double suffering in the Fire.”
And they will say, “What is the matter with us, that we do not see men whom we used to count among the wicked?
Did we take them for mockery? Or did the eyes overlook them?”
This is certainly true—the feuding of the people of the Fire.
Say, “I am only a warner, and there is no god except Allah—the One, the Conqueror.
The Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them—the Mighty, the Forgiver.”
Say, “It is a message of great importance.
From which you are turning away.
I have no knowledge of the Highest Assembly as they dispute.
It is only revealed to me that I am a clear warner.”
Your Lord said to the angels, “I am creating a human being from clay.
When I have proportioned him, and breathed into him of My spirit, fall down in prostration to him.”
So the angels prostrated, all of them together.
Except for Iblis. He was too proud, and one of the faithless.
He said, “O Iblis, what prevented you from prostrating before what I created with My Hands? Are you too proud, or are you among the exalted?”
He said, “I am better than he. You created me from fire, and You created him from clay.”
He said, “Then get out of here. You are an outcast.
And My curse is upon you until Judgement Day.”
He said, “My Lord, defer me until the Day they are resurrected.”
He said, “You will be deferred.
Until the Day of the time well-known.”
He said, “By Your Majesty, I will seduce them all.
Except for your devoted servants among them.”
He said, “The truth is, and the truth I say.
I will fill Hell with you and with whoever follows you from among them, all together.”
Say, “I ask of you no wage for this, and I am not a pretender.
It is but a reminder for all people.
And you will know its news after a while.”
The revelation of the Book is from Allah, the Mighty and Wise.
We sent down to you the Book with the truth: so worship Allah, devoting your religion to Him.
Is not to Allah that sincere faith is due? As for those who take other lords beside Him, “We serve them only so that they may bring us closer to Allah.” Allah will judge between them regarding what they differ about. Allah does not guide the lying blasphemer.
If Allah wanted to have a child, He would have selected anyone He willed from what He created. Glory be to Him. He is Allah, the One, the Irresistible.
He created the heavens and the earth with truth. He wraps the night around the day, and He wraps the day around the night. And He regulated the sun and the moon, each running along a specific course. He is the Almighty, the Forgiver.
He created you from a single soul. Then from it, He made its mate. And He brought down for you livestock—eight kinds in pairs. He creates you in your mothers’ wombs, in successive formations, in triple darknesses. That is Allah, your Lord. Sovereignty belongs to Him. There is no god but He. So what made you deviate?
If you disbelieve, Allah does not need you, yet He does not approve disbelief by His servants. And if you are thankful, He will approve that in you. No bearer of burdens can bear the burdens of another. Then to your Lord is your return, and He will inform you of what you used to do. He knows what is inside the hearts.
When some adversity touches the human being, he prays to his Lord, turning to Him. But then, when He gives him a favor from Himself, he forgets what he was praying for previously, and he attributes equals to Allah, to lead away from His way. Say, “Enjoy your disbelief for a little while; you are among the inmates of the Fire.”
What of him who is devoutly obedient during the watches of the night, prostrating and standing, mindful of the Hereafter, and hoping for his Lord’s Mercy? Say, “Are those who know and those who do not know equal?” Only the people of understanding take notice.
Say, “O My devotees who have believed, keep your duty to your Lord. For those who do good in this world, there is goodness; and Allah’s earth is vast.” Those who are patient will be given their reward without reckoning.”
Say, “I was commanded to worship Allah, dedicating my faith entirely to Him.
And I was commanded to be of the first of those who submit.”
Say, “I fear, should I disobey my Lord, the punishment of a tremendous day.”
Say, “It is Allah I worship, being sincere in my devotion to Him.”
“So worship whatever you want besides Him.” Say, “The losers are those who will lose themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.” That is the obvious loss.
They will have layers of Fire above them, and layers beneath them. This is how Allah strikes fear into His servants. “O My servants, reverence Me.”
As for those who shun the worship of false gods, and turn to Allah—theirs is the good news. So give good news to My worshipers.
Those who listen to the Word, and follow the best of it. It is they whom Allah has guided, and it is they who are the possessors of intellect.
What about someone who has deserved the sentence of punishment? Is it you who can save those in the Fire?
But those mindful of their Lord will have mansions upon mansions, built high, with streams flowing beneath them. The promise of Allah—Allah never breaks a promise.
Have you not considered that Allah sends down water from the sky, conducts it as springs in the earth, then He produces with it vegetation of various colors, which later withers, and you see it yellowing, then He turns it into debris? Surely in this is a reminder for possessors of understanding.
What about someone whose chest Allah has expanded for Submission, so he is enlightened by his Lord? So woe to those whose hearts are hardened against the remembrance of Allah. These are in obvious error.
Allah sent down the best of messages: A Book consistent and paired. The skins of those who fear their Lord shiver from it. Then their skins and their hearts soften up to Allah’s remembrance. That is Allah’s guidance; He guides with it whom He wills. But whomever Allah leads astray, for him there is no guide.
What about someone who shields his face against the terrible misery of the Day of Resurrection? To the evildoers, it will be said, “Taste what you used to earn.”
Those before them denied the truth, so the torment came upon them from where they did not perceive.
So Allah made them taste humiliation in the worldly life, but far worse is the punishment of the Hereafter, if they only knew.
We have cited in this Quran for people every kind of example, so they may be mindful.
A Quran in Arabic, with no distortion, so they may be righteous.
Allah cites the example of a man shared by partners at odds, and a man belonging exclusively to one man. Are they equal in condition? Praise be to Allah, but most of them do not know.
You will die, and they will die.
Then, on the Day of Resurrection, you will quarrel before your Lord.
Who is more unjust than he who lies against Allah, and denies the truth when it has come to him? Is there not in Gehenna room for the ungrateful?
But whoever promotes the truth and testifies to it—it is they who are the reverent.
They will have whatever they desire with their Lord. That is the reward of the good-doers.
So that Allah may acquit them of the worst of their deeds, and reward them according to the best of what they used to do.
Is Allah not enough for His servant? And they frighten you with those besides Him. Whomever Allah sends astray, for him there is no guide.
And whomever Allah guides, for him there is no misleader. Is Allah not Powerful, Possessor of Vengeance?
And if you asked them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” they would say, “Allah.” Say, “Have you considered those you call upon, apart from Allah? If Allah desires some harm for me, could they remove His harm, or if He desires some mercy for me, could they withhold His Mercy?” Say, “Allah is enough for me. On Him, the reliant rely.”
Say: “O my people! Work according to your ability, and so will I. You will soon know.
Upon whom comes a punishment that disgraces him, and upon whom falls lasting suffering.”
We sent down to you the Book for humanity in truth. Whoever is guided—it is for the sake of his own soul. And whoever strays, he strays only to its detriment. And you are not a keeper over them.
Allah takes the souls at the moment of their death, and those that have not died, during their sleep. Then He keeps those for whom He has ordained death, and He releases the others until a predetermined time. Surely in this are signs for people who reflect.
Or have they taken intercessors apart from Allah? Say, Even though they have no power over anything, and are devoid of reason?”
Say, “All intercession belongs to Allah. To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. Then to Him, you will be returned.”
And when Allah alone is mentioned: the hearts of those who do not believe in the Hereafter shrink with disgust. But when those apart from Him are mentioned: they suddenly rejoice.
Say, “Our God, Originator of the heavens and the earth, Knower of secrets and declarations. You will judge between Your servants regarding what they differed about.”
If those who work evil possessed all that is on earth, and the like of it besides, they would offer it to redeem themselves from the awful suffering of the Day of Resurrection. And there will appear to them from Allah what they never expected.
And the evils of their deeds will unfold before them, and they will be besieged by what they used to ridicule.
When adversity touches the human being, he calls on Us. But then, when We favor him with a blessing from Us, he says, “I have attained this because of my knowledge.” However, it is a test, but most of them do not know.
Those before them said the same, but their gains were of no benefit to them.
The evils of their deeds caught up with them. And the wrongdoers among these will be overtaken by the evils of their deeds, and they cannot prevent it.
Do they not know that Allah extends the provision to whomever He wills—and restricts it? Surely in this are signs for people who believe.
Say, “O My servants who have transgressed against their souls: do not despair of Allah’s mercy, for Allah forgives all sins. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
And turn to your Lord in repentance, and submit to Him, before the punishment comes upon you, and you will not be helped.
And follow the best of what was revealed to you from your Lord, before the punishment comes upon you suddenly, while you are unaware.
So that a soul may not say, “How sorry I am, for having neglected my duty to Allah, and for having been of the scoffers.”
Or say, “Had Allah guided me, I would have been of the reverent.”
Or say, upon seeing the punishment, “If only I had a second chance, I would be of the virtuous.”
Yes indeed. My Verses came to you, but you called them lies, turned arrogant, and were of the faithless.
On the Day of Resurrection, you will see those who told lies about Allah with their faces blackened. Is Hell not the proper place for the arrogant?
And Allah will save those who maintained righteousness to their place of salvation. No harm will touch them, nor will they grieve.
Allah is the Creator of all things, and He is the Maintainer of all things.
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. But those who reject Allah’s Verses—it is they who are the losers.
Say, “Is it other than Allah you urge me to worship, you ignorant ones?”
It was revealed to you, and to those before you, that if you ascribe partners, your deeds will be in vain, and you will be among the losers.
Rather, worship Allah, and be of the appreciative.
They have not esteemed Allah as He ought to be esteemed. The entire earth will be in His Grip on the Day of Resurrection, and the heavens will be folded in His Right. Immaculate is He, and Transcendent is He beyond the associations they make.
And the Trumpet will be blown, and everyone in the heavens and the earth will be stunned, except those whom Allah wills. Then it will be blown another time, and they will rise, looking on.
And the earth will shine with the Light of its Lord, and the Record will be set in place, and the prophets and the witnesses will be brought in, and Judgment will be made between them equitably, and they will not be wronged.
And every soul will be fully compensated for what it had done. He is well aware of what they do.
Those who disbelieved will be driven to Hell in crowds. Until, when they have reached it, and its gates are opened, its keepers will say to them, “Did messengers not come to you from among you, reciting to you the Verses of your Lord, and warning you of the meeting of this Day of yours?” They will say, “Yes, but the verdict of punishment is justified against the unbelievers.”
It will be said, “Enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever.” What an evil home for the arrogant.
And those who were mindful of their Lord will be led to Paradise in crowds. Until, when they have reached it, and its gates are opened, its keepers will say to them, “Peace be upon you, you have done well, so enter it, to reside in it eternally.”
And they will say, “Praise be to Allah, who has fulfilled His promise to us, and made us inherit the land, enjoying Paradise as we please.” How excellent is the reward of the workers!
And you will see the angels hovering around the Throne, glorifying their Lord with praise. And judgment will be made between them in truth, and it will be said, “Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.”
Ha. Meem.
The sending down of the Scripture is from Allah the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
Forgiver of sins, Acceptor of repentance, Severe in punishment, Infinite in bounty. There is no god except He. To Him is the final return.
None argues against Allah’s revelations except those who disbelieve. So be not impressed by their activities in the land.
Before them, the people of Noah rejected the truth, as did the Confederates after them. Every community plotted against its messenger, to capture him. And they argued with falsehood, to discredit with it the truth. But I seized them. What a punishment it was!
And so your Lord’s decree was justified against those who disbelieve—that they are the inmates of the Fire.
Those who carry the Throne, and those around it, glorify their Lord with praise, and believe in Him, and ask forgiveness for those who believe: “Our Lord, You have encompassed all things in mercy and knowledge, so forgive those who repent and follow Your path, and protect them from the agony of the Blaze.
And admit them, Our Lord, into the Gardens of Eternity, which You have promised them, together with the righteous among their parents, and their spouses, and their descendants. You are the Mighty, the Wise.
And shield them from evil deeds. Whomever You shield from evil deeds on that Day, upon him You had mercy. That is the supreme achievement.”
Those who disbelieved will be addressed, “Allah’s loathing is greater than your loathing of yourselves—for you were invited to faith, but you refused.”
They will say, “Our Lord, twice You made us die, and twice you gave us life. Now we confess our sins. Is there a way out?”
That is because when Allah alone was called upon, you disbelieved; but when others were associated with Him, you believed. Judgment rests with Allah the Sublime, the Majestic.
It is He who shows you His wonders and sends down sustenance from the sky for you. But none will be mindful except the repentant.
So call upon Allah, with sincere devotion to Him, even though the disbelievers hate it.
Exalted in rank, Possessor of the Throne. He conveys the Spirit, by His command, upon whom He wills of His servants, to warn of the Day of Encounter.
The Day when they will emerge, nothing about them is hidden from Allah. “To whom does sovereignty belong today?” “To Allah, the One, the Irresistible.”
On that Day: every soul will be rewarded for what it had done. There will be no injustice on that Day. Allah is quick to settle accounts.
And warn them of the Day of Imminence, when the hearts are at the throats, choking them. The wrongdoers will have no dependable friend, and no mediator to be obeyed.
He knows the eyes’ deception, and what the hearts conceal.
Allah judges with justice, while those whom they invoke besides Him cannot judge with anything. It is Allah who is the Hearer, the Seer.
Have they not journeyed through the earth, and seen the fate of those before them? They were superior to them in might, and they left more impact on earth. But Allah seized them for their sins, and they had no defender against Allah.
That is because their messengers used to come to them with clear proofs, but they persisted in disbelief, so Allah seized them. He is All-Powerful, Severe in retribution.
We sent Moses with Our signs—and a clear authorization.
To Pharaoh, Hamaan, and Korah. But they said, “A lying magician.”
Then, when he came to them with the truth from Us, they said, “Kill the sons of those who believe with him, and spare their women.” But the schemes of the unbelievers can only fail.
Pharaoh said, “Leave me to kill Moses, and let him appeal to his Lord. I fear he may change your religion, or spread disorder in the land.”
Moses said, “I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord, from every arrogant who does not believe in the Day of Account.”
A believing man from Pharaoh's family, who was hiding his faith, said, “Will you kill a man for saying, `My Lord is Allah,’ although he has come to you with clear proofs from your Lord? If he is a liar, his lie will be upon him. But if he is truthful, then some of what he promises you will befall you. Allah does not guide the extravagant liar.
O, my people! Authority is yours today, prominent on the land. But who will help us against Allah’s might, should it come upon us?” Pharaoh said, “I do not show you except what I see, and I do not guide you except to the path of prudence.”
And he who believed said, “O my people, I fear for you the like of the day of the Confederates.
Like the plight of the people of Noah, and Aad, and Thamood, and those after them. Allah intends no injustice for the servants.
O, my people! I fear for you the Day of Calling.
The Day you will turn away to flee, having none to protect you from Allah. Whomever Allah leaves to stray, has no guide.”
Joseph already came to you with clear revelations, but you never ceased to doubt what he came to you with. Until, when he perished, you said, “Allah will never send a messenger after him.” Thus Allah leaves the outrageous skeptic to stray.
Those who argue against Allah’s revelations, with no proof having come to them—grievous and despised it is by Allah and those who believe. Thus Allah seals the heart of every arrogant bully.
And Pharaoh said, “O Hamaan, build me a tower, that I may reach the pathways.
The pathways of the heavens, so that I may look at the God of Moses, although I think he is a liar.” Thus Pharaoh’s evil deeds were made to appear good to him, and he was averted from the path. Pharaoh's guile was only in defeat.
And the one who believed said, “O my people, follow me, and I will guide you to the path of rectitude.”
“O my people, this worldly life is only enjoyment, but the Hereafter is the Home of Permanence.
Whoever commits a bad deed will be repaid only with its equivalent. And whoever works righteousness—whether male or female, and is a believer—these will enter Paradise, where they will be provided for without account.
O my people, how is it that I invite you to salvation, while you invite me to the Fire?
You invite me to reject Allah, and to associate with Him what I have no knowledge of, while I invite you to the Almighty, the Forgiver.
Without a doubt, what you invite me to has no say in this world, nor in the Hereafter. And our turning back is to Allah. And the transgressors are the inmates of the Fire.
You will remember what I am telling you, and I commit my case to Allah. Allah is Observant of the servants.”
So Allah protected him from the evils of their scheming, and a terrible punishment besieged Pharaoh’s clan.
The Fire, to which they are exposed morning and evening. And on the Day the Hour takes place: “Admit Pharaoh’s clan to the most intense suffering.”
As they quarrel in the Fire, the meek will say to those who were arrogant, “We were your followers, will you give us some relief from the Fire?”
Those who were arrogant will say, “We are all in it—Allah has judged between the servants.”
And those in the Fire will say to the keepers of Hell, “Call upon your Lord to lessen our suffering for one day.”
They will say, “Did your Messengers not come to you with clear evidence?” They will say, “Yes.” They will say, “Then pray, but the prayer of the unbelievers is only in vain.”
Most certainly, We will support Our messengers and those who believe, in this life, and on the Day when the witnesses arise.
The Day when the wrongdoers’ excuses will not benefit them, and they will have the curse, and they will have the worst home.
We gave Moses the guidance, and We made the Children of Israel inherit the Scripture.
A guide and a reminder for those endowed with understanding.
So persevere. The promise of Allah is true. And ask forgiveness for your sin. And proclaim your Lord’s praises evening and morning.
Those who dispute Allah’s revelations with no authority having come to them: there is nothing in their hearts except the feeling of greatness, which they will never attain. So seek refuge in Allah. He is the All-Hearing, the All-Seeing.
The creation of the heavens and the earth is greater than the creation of humanity, but most people do not know.
Not equal are the blind and the seeing, nor are those who believe and work righteousness equal to the sinners. Little do you reflect!
The Hour is certainly coming: there is no doubt about it. But most people do not believe.
And your Lord has proclaimed, “Pray to Me, and I will respond to you. But those who are too proud to worship Me will enter Hell forcibly.”
It is Allah Who made the night for you, to rest in it; and the day allowing sight. Allah is gracious towards people, but most people are not thankful.
That is Allah, your Lord, Creator of all things. There is no god but He. So how can you be deluded?
Thus are deluded those who oppose Allah’s revelations.
It is Allah who made the earth a habitat for you, and the sky a structure. And He designed you, and He designed you well, and He provided you with good things. That is Allah, your Lord. So Blessed is Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
He is the Living. There is no god except He. So call upon Him, devoting your religion entirely to Him. Praise be to Allah, Lord of the Worlds.
Say, “I was prohibited from worshiping those you call upon besides Allah, now that clear proofs have come to me from my Lord. And I was commanded to submit to the Lord of the Universe.”
It is He who created you from dust, then from a drop, then from a clot, then He brings you out as infants, so that you may reach your prime, then you become elderly—although some of you die sooner—so that you may reach a predetermined age, so that you may understand.
It is He who gives life and causes death. And when He decides on an issue, He says to it, “Be,” and it comes to be.
Have you not considered those who dispute Allah's revelations, how they are turned away?
Those who call the Book a lie, and what We sent Our messengers with—they will surely know.
With shackles around their necks. And dragged by the chains.
Into the boiling water. Then in the Fire, they will be consumed.
Then it will be said to them, “Where are those you used to deify?
Instead of Allah?” They will say, “They abandoned us. In fact, we were praying to nothing.” Thus Allah leads the unbelievers to stray.
That is because you used to rejoice on earth in other than the truth, and because you used to behave with vanity.
Enter the gates of Hell, to stay there forever. How evil is the dwelling of the arrogant!
So be patient. The promise of Allah is true. Whether We show you some of what We have promised them, or take you, to Us they will be returned.
We sent messengers before you: some of them We told you about, and some We did not tell you about. No messenger can bring a sign, except with Allah’s permission. So when Allah’s command comes, judgment will be passed in fairness, and there and then the seekers of falsehood will lose.
Allah is He who created the domestic animals for you: some for you to ride, and some you eat.
And in them, you have other benefits. And through them, you satisfy your needs. And on them, and on the ships, you are transported.
And He shows you His signs. So which of Allah’s signs will you deny?
Have they not journeyed through the earth, and seen the outcome for those before them? They were more numerous than they, and they had greater power and influence on earth. But what they had achieved availed them nothing.
When their messengers came to them with clear proofs, they rejoiced in the knowledge they had, and so the very things they used to ridicule besieged them.
Then, when they witnessed Our might, they said, “We believe in Allah alone, and we reject what we used to associate with Him.”
But their faith did not benefit them when they witnessed Our punishment. This has been Allah’s way of dealing with His servants. There and then the disbelievers lost.
Ha. Meem.
A revelation from the Compassionate, the Merciful.
A Scripture whose Verses are detailed. A Quran in Arabic for people who know.
Delivering good news and bringing warnings. But most of them turn away, so they do not listen.
And they say, “Our hearts are screened from what you call us to, and there is deafness in our ears, and there is a veil between us and you. So do whatever you want, and so will we.”
Say, “I am only a human being like you. It is inspired in me that your God is One God. So be upright towards Him. And seek forgiveness from Him.” And woe to the idolaters.
Those who do not give the alms; and regarding the Hereafter, they are in denial.
As for those who believe and do righteous deeds—for them is an unending reward.
Say, “Do you reject the One who created the earth in two stages? And you attribute equals to Him? That is the Lord of the Universe.”
He placed stabilizers over it, and He blessed it, and He assigned its foods in four stages—equally for the seekers.
Then He turned towards the sky, and it was smoke, and He said to it and to the earth, “Come, willingly or unwillingly.” They said, “We come willingly.”
Then He completed them seven universes, in two Days. And He assigned to each universe its law. And We decorated the lower universe with lamps, and for protection. That is the design of the Almighty, the All-Knowing.
If they turn away, say, “I have warned you of a thunderbolt, like the thunderbolt of Aad and Thamood.”
When their messengers came to them, from the front of them, and from behind them: “Worship none but Allah.” They said, “Had our Lord willed, He would have sent down angels; so we reject what you are sent with.”
As for Aad, they acted arrogantly on earth, and opposed justice, and said, “Who is more powerful than us?” Have they not considered that Allah, Who created them, is more powerful than them? And they went on denying Our revelations.
So We unleashed upon them a screaming wind, for a few miserable days, to make them taste the punishment of shame in this life. But the punishment of the Hereafter is more shameful—and they will not be helped.
As for Thamood, We guided them, but they preferred blindness over guidance. So the thunderbolt of the humiliating punishment overtook them, because of what they used to do.
And We saved those who believed and were cautious.
On the Day when Allah’s enemies are herded to the Fire, forcibly.
Until, when they have reached it, their hearing, and their sight, and their skins will testify against them regarding what they used to do.
And they will say to their skins, “Why did you testify against us?” They will say, “Allah, Who made everything speak, made us speak. He who created you the first time; and to Him, you will be returned.”
You were unable to hide yourselves from your hearing, and your sight, and your skins, to prevent them from testifying against you. And you imagined that Allah was unaware of much of what you were doing.
It is that thought of yours about your Lord that led you to ruin—so you became among the losers.
If they endure patiently, the Fire is their residence. And if they make up excuses, they will not be pardoned.
We had assigned companions for them, who glamorized for them what was in front of them, and what was behind them. And the Word proved true against them in communities of jinn and humans that have passed away before them. They were lost.
And those who disbelieve say, “Do not listen to this Quran, and talk over it, so that you may prevail.”
We will make those who disbelieve taste an intense agony, and We will recompense them according to the worst of what they used to do.
Such is the repayment for Allah’s enemies—the Fire—they have the eternal home in it, in return for having disregarded Our revelations.
Those who disbelieved will say, “Our Lord, show us those who misguided us—among jinn and humans—and we will trample them under our feet, so they become of the lowliest.”
Those who say: “Our Lord is Allah,” and then go straight, the angels descend upon them: “Do not fear, nor grieve, and rejoice in the Garden which you were promised.
We are your allies in this life and in the Hereafter; where you will have whatever your souls desire, and there you will have whatever you ask for.
Hospitality from a Merciful Forgiver.”
And who is better in speech than someone who invites to Allah, acts with integrity, and says, “I am of those who submit”?
Good and evil are not equal. Repel by what is better, and the person who was your enemy will become like an intimate friend.
But none will attain it except those who are patient. And none will attain it except the very fortunate.
And when a temptation from Satan provokes you, seek refuge in Allah; He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Among His signs are the night and the day, and the sun and the moon. Do not bow down to the sun, nor to the moon, but bow down to Allah, Who created them both, if it is Him that you worship.
But if they are too proud—those in the presence of your Lord praise Him night and day, and without ever tiring.
And among His signs is that you see the land still. But when We send down water on it, it stirs and grows. He Who revived it will revive the dead. He is capable of all things.
Those who distort Our Verses are not hidden from Us. Is he who is hurled into the Fire better? Or he who arrives safely on the Day of Resurrection? Do as you will; He is Seeing of everything you do.
Those who reject the Reminder when it has come to them—it is an invincible Book.
Falsehood cannot approach it—neither from its front, nor from its back. A revelation from a Wise and Praised.
Nothing is said to you but was said to the Messengers before you: your Lord is Possessor of Forgiveness, and Possessor of painful repayment.
Had We made it a Quran in a foreign language, they would have said, “If only its verses were made clear.” In a Foreign language, and an Arab? Say, “For those who believe, it is guidance and healing. But as for those who do not believe: there is a deafness in their ears, and it is blindness for them. These are being called from a faraway place.”
We gave Moses the Book, but disputes arose concerning it. Were it not for a prior decree from your Lord, their differences would have been settled. But they are in serious doubt about it.
Whoever acts righteously, does so for his own soul. And whoever works evil, does so to its detriment. Your Lord is not unjust to the servants.
To Him is referred the knowledge of the Hour. No fruit emerges from its husk, and no female conceives or delivers, except with His knowledge. And on the Day when He calls to them, “Where are My associates?” They will say, “We admit to you, none of us bears witness.”
What they used to call on before will abandon them, and they will realize that they have no refuge.
The human being never tires of praying for good. But when adversity afflicts him, he despairs and loses hope.
And when We let him taste mercy from Us, after the adversity that had afflicted him, he will say, “This is mine, and I do not think the Hour is coming. And even if I am returned to my Lord, I will have the very best with Him.” We will inform those who disbelieve of what they did, and We will make them taste a harsh punishment.
And when We provide comfort for the human being, he withdraws and distances himself; but when adversity befalls him, he starts lengthy prayers.
Say, “Have you considered? If it is from Allah and you reject it—who is more misguided  than he who is cut-off and alienated?”
We will show them Our signs on the horizons, and within themselves—until it becomes clear to them that it is the truth. Is it not enough that your Lord is a witness over everything?
Surely, they are in doubt about the meeting with their Lord. Surely, He surrounds everything.
Ha. Meem.
Ayn. Seen. Qaf.
Thus He inspires you, and those before you—Allah the Almighty, the Wise.
To Him belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth. And He is the Sublime, the Magnificent.
The heavens nearly burst, one above the other, while the angels praise their Lord's glory, and ask forgiveness for those on earth. Allah is indeed the Forgiver, the Merciful.
As for those who take protectors apart from Him: Allah is Keeper over them, and you are not a guardian over them.
Thus We inspired you with an Arabic Quran, so you may warn the Central Town and its vicinity, and to warn of the Day of Assembly—about which there is no doubt. A group in the Garden, and a group in the Furnace.
Had Allah willed, He would have made them a single community, but He admits into His mercy whom He wills. As for the wrongdoers, they will have no protector and no helper.
Or have they adopted protectors besides him? Allah is the Protector, and He gives life to the dead, and He is capable of all things.
Whatever you may differ about: its judgment rests with Allah. “That is Allah—my Lord. In Him, I trust. And to Him, I turn.”
The Originator of the heavens and the earth. He made for you mates from among yourselves, and pairs of animals, through which He multiplies you. There is nothing like Him. He is the Hearing, the Seeing.
To Him belong the keys of the heavens and the earth. He spreads the bounties to whomever He wills, or He reduces it. He has knowledge of all things.
He has appointed for you the same religion He enjoined upon Noah, and what We inspired in you, and what We enjoined upon Abraham, Moses, and Jesus: “You shall uphold the faith, and be not divided in it.” Difficult for the associators is what you are calling them to. Allah chooses for Himself whom He wills, and He guides to Himself whoever repents.
They became divided only after knowledge came to them, out of envy among themselves. Were it not for a predetermined decision from your Lord, judgment would have been pronounced between them. Yet those who were made to inherit the Scripture after them are in serious doubt about it.
Therefore, to this go on inviting, and be upright as you were commanded, and do not follow their inclinations, and say, “I believe in whatever Book Allah has sent down, and I was commanded to judge between you equitably. Allah is our Lord, and your Lord. We have our deeds, and you have your deeds. Let there be no quarrel between us and you. Allah will bring us together. And to Him, is the final return.”
As for those who argue about Allah after having answered His call, their argument is invalid with their Lord; and upon them falls wrath; and they will have a severe punishment.
It is Allah who revealed the Book with the truth and the Balance. And what will make you realize, that perhaps the Hour is near?
Those who do not believe in it seek to hasten it. But those who believe are concerned about it, and they know it to be the truth. Unquestionably, those who question the Hour are in utmost error.
Allah is kind towards His worshipers. He provides for whom He wills. And He is the Powerful, the Honorable.
Whoever desires the harvest of the Hereafter, We will increase for him his harvest. And whoever desires the harvest of this world, We will give them some of it, but He will have no share of the Hereafter.
Or do they have partners who litigate for them religious laws never authorized by Allah? Were it not for the decisive Word, it would have been settled between them. The wrongdoers will have a painful punishment.
You see the unjust worried about what they have committed, and it will befall them. As for those who believe and do good deeds, they will be in the Meadows of the Gardens; they will have whatever they please in the presence of their Lord; that is the supreme bounty.
That is the good news which Allah gives to His servants who believe and do good deeds. Say, “I ask of you no wage for it, except affection among the near of kin.” Whoever does a good deed, We will increase its goodness for him. Allah is Forgiving and Appreciative.
Or do they say, “He forged a lie about Allah.” If Allah so willed, He could have sealed your heart. But Allah obliterates the false, and He confirms the truth with His Words. He knows what the hearts contain.
And it is He who accepts repentance from His worshipers, and remits the sins, and knows what you do.
And He answers those who believe and do good works, and He increases for them out of His grace. But the unbelievers will have a severe punishment.
If Allah were to expand the provision to His servants, they would transgress on earth. But He sends down in precise measure whatever He wills. Regarding His servants, He is Expert and Observant.
And it is He who brings down rain after they have despaired—and unfolds His mercy. And He is the Guardian, the Praised.
And among His signs is the creation of the heavens and the earth, and the creatures He spread throughout them—and He is Able to gather them at will.
Whatever misfortune befalls you, it is because of what your hands have committed. Yet He pardons much.
You can never escape on earth. And besides Allah, you have no ally and no helper.
And among His signs are the ships sailing the sea like flags.
If He wills, He can calm the wind, leaving them motionless on its surface. Surely in this are signs for every patient, thankful person.
Or He could wreck them because of what they have committed. Yet He forgives much.
So that those who dispute Our signs will know that there is no asylum for them.
Whatever you are given is only the enjoyment of this life. But what Allah possesses is better and more lasting for those who believe and trust in their Lord.
And those who avoid major sins and indecencies; and when they become angry, they forgive.
And those who respond to their Lord, and pray regularly, and conduct their affairs by mutual consultation, and donate from what We have provided for them.
And those who, when tyranny strikes them, defend themselves.
The repayment of a bad action is its equivalent. But whoever forgives and seeks reconciliation, his reward is upon Allah. He certainly does not love the wrongdoers.
As for those who retaliate after being wronged: there is no blame on them.
Blame is only on those who wrong people, and unjustifiably commit injustice on earth. These will have a painful punishment.
But whoever endures patiently and forgives—that is a course worthy of resolve.
Whomever Allah leaves astray has no protector beyond Him. And you will see the wrongdoers, when they see the suffering, saying, “Is there any way back?”
And you will see them exposed to it, cowering from disgrace, glancing around covertly. Those who believed will say, “The losers are those who have lost themselves and their families on the Day of Resurrection.” Surely the wrongdoers will be in lasting suffering.
They will have no allies to help them against Allah. Whoever Allah leaves to stray—for him, there is no way.
Respond to your Lord before the coming of a Day from Allah that cannot be turned back. You will have no refuge on that Day, nor any means of denial.
But if they turn away—We did not send you as a guardian over them. Your duty is only to deliver. And when We make the human being taste mercy from Us, he rejoices in it. But when harm afflicts them, because of what their hands have perpetrated, the human being turns blasphemous.
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He creates whatever He wills. He grants females to whomever He wills, and He grants males to whomever He wills.
Or He combines them, males and females; and He renders whomever He wills infertile. He is Knowledgeable and Capable.
It is not for any human being that Allah should speak to him, except by inspiration, or from behind a veil, or by sending a messenger to reveal whatever He wills by His leave. He is Superior and Wise.
We thus inspired in you a Spirit by Our command. You did not know what Scripture was, nor what faith was. But We made it a light, guiding with it whom We will of Our servants. You surely guide to a straight path.
The path of Allah, to Whom belongs everything in the heavens and everything on earth. Surely, to Allah, all matters revert.
Ha. Meem.
By the Book that makes things clear.
We made it a Quran in Arabic, so that you may understand.
And it is in the Book's Source with Us: outstanding and wise.
Should We withdraw the Reminder from you, since you are an excessive people?
How many a prophet did We send among the ancients?
No messenger came to them, but they ridiculed him.
We destroyed people more powerful than them, and the example of the ancients has passed away.
And if you asked them, “Who created the heavens and the earth?” They would say, “The Almighty, the All-Knowing created them.”
He who made the earth a habitat for you, and traced pathways on it for you, so that you may be guided.
And He who sends down water from the sky in a precise measure, with which We give life to a lifeless land. Similarly, you will be brought out.
And He Who created the pairs, all of them, and provided you with ships and animals on which you ride.
That you may mount their backs, and remember your Lord’s blessings once you have settled on them, and say, “Glory to the One Who placed these at our service; surely, we could not have done it by ourselves.
And surely, to our Lord, we will return.”
Yet they made one of His servants a part of Him. The human being is clearly ungrateful.
Or did He take daughters from what He created, and He favored you with sons?
Yet when one of them is given news of what he attributes to the Compassionate, his face darkens, and he chokes with grief.
“Someone raised amid ornaments, and cannot produce a clear argument?”
And they appoint the angels, who are servants to the Compassionate, as females. Did they witness their creation? Their claim will be recorded, and they will be questioned.
And they say, “Had the Most Gracious willed, we would have never worshipped them.” But they have no knowledge of that. They do nothing but lie.
Or did We give them a book prior to this one, to which they adhere?
But they say, “We found our parents on a course, and we are guided in their footsteps.”
Likewise, We sent no warner before you to any town, but the elite among them said, “We found our forefathers on a course, and we are following in their footsteps.”
He would say, “Even if I bring you better guidance than what you found your forefathers following?” They would say, “We reject what you are sent with.”
So We wreaked vengeance on them. See, then, what the fate of the deniers was.
When Abraham said to his father and his people, “I am innocent of what you worship.
Except for He who originated me, and He will guide me.”
And He made it a word enduring among his descendants, so that they may return.
I gave these and their forefathers some enjoyment—until the truth came to them, and a messenger making things clear.
But when the truth came to them, they said, “This is sorcery, and we refuse to believe in it.”
And they said, “Why was this Quran not sent down to a man of importance from the two towns?”
Is it they who allocate your Lord’s mercy? We have allocated for them their livelihood among them in this life, and We elevated some of them above others in rank, so that some of them may employ others in service. But your Lord’s mercy is better than what they accumulate.
Were it not that humanity would become a single community, We would have provided those who disbelieve in the Most Gracious with silver roofs to their houses—and stairways by which they ascend.
And doors to their houses, and furnishings on which they recline.
And decorations. Yet all this is nothing but the possessions of this life. Yet the Hereafter, in the presence of your Lord, is for the reverent.
Whoever shuns the remembrance of the Mercy-Giver, We assign for him a devil, to be his companion.
They hinder them from the path, though they think they are guided.
Until, when he comes to Us, he will say, “If only there were between me and you the distance of the two Easts! What an evil companion!”
Yet on that Day, it will not benefit you, since you did wrong, to share in the punishment.
Can you make the deaf hear, or guide the blind, and him who is in obvious error?
Even if We take you away, We will wreak vengeance on them.
Or show you what We have promised them; We have absolute power over them.
So adhere to what is revealed to you. You are on a straight path.
It is a message for you, and for your people, and you will be questioned.
And ask those of Our messengers whom We sent before you: “Did We appoint any gods to be served other than the Beneficent?”
We sent Moses with Our revelations to Pharaoh and his dignitaries. He said, “I am the Messenger of the Lord of the Worlds.”
But when he brought them Our signs, they started laughing at them.
Every miracle We showed them was more marvelous than its counterpart. And We afflicted them with the plagues, so that they may return.
They said, “O magician, pray to your Lord on our behalf, by virtue of the covenant He made with you, and we will be guided.”
Yet when We lifted the suffering from them, they immediately broke their promise.
Then Pharaoh proclaimed among his people, saying, “O my people, do I not own the Kingdom of Egypt, and these rivers flow beneath me? Do you not see?
Am I not better than this miserable wretch, who can barely express himself?
So why bracelets of gold are not dropped on him, or the angels came with him in procession?”
Thus he belittled his people, and they obeyed him. They were disobedient people.
And when they provoked Our wrath, We took vengeance on them, and We drowned them all.
And We made them a precedent and an example for the later ones.
And when the son of Mary was cited as an example, your people turned away from it.
They said, “Are our gods better, or is he?” They cited him only for argument. In fact, they are a quarrelsome people.
He was just a servant whom We favored, and We made him an example for the Children of Israel.
Had We willed, We would have appointed angels among you, succeeding one another on earth.
And he is an indication of the Hour, so have no doubt about it, and follow Me. This is a straight path.
And let not Satan turn you away. He is an open enemy to you.
And when Jesus came with the clear proofs, he said, “I have come to you with wisdom, and to clarify for you some of what you differ about. So reverence Allah, and obey me.
Allah is my Lord and your Lord, so worship Him—this is a straight path.”
But the factions differed among themselves. So woe to those who do wrong from the punishment of a painful Day.
Are they only waiting for the Hour to come upon them suddenly? When they are not expecting it?
On that day, friends will be enemies of one another, except the righteous.
O, My worshipers! You have nothing to fear on that Day, nor will you grieve.
Those who believed in Our revelations and were submitters.
Enter Paradise, you and your spouses, made joyous.
They will be served around with trays of gold, and goblets. Therein is whatever the souls desire and delights the eyes. Therein you will stay forever.
This is the Garden you are made to inherit, because of what you used to do.
There you will have abundant fruit, from which you eat.
As for the guilty: they will be in the suffering of Hell, forever.
It will never be eased for them. In it, they will be devastated.
We did them no injustice, but it was they who were the unjust.
And they will cry, “O Malek, let your Lord finish us off.” He will say, “You are staying.”
We have given you the truth, but most of you dislike the truth.
Or have they mastered some scheme? We are planning.
Or do they think that We cannot hear their secrets and their whispers? Yes indeed; and Our envoys are with them, writing.
Say, “If the Compassionate had a child, I would be the first of the worshipers.”
Glorified is the Lord of the heavens and the earth, the Lord of the Throne, beyond what they describe.
So leave them to blunder and play, until they meet their Day which they are promised.
And it is He who is Allah in heaven, and Allah on earth. And He is the Wise, the Knower.
And Blessed is He to Whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth and everything between them, and with Whom is knowledge of the Hour, and to Whom you will be returned.
Those they call upon besides Him have no power of intercession; except whoever testifies with the truth, and they know.
And if you asked them, “Who created them?” They would say, “Allah.” Then why do they deviate?
As for his statement: “O my Lord, these are a people who do not believe.”
Pardon them, and say, “Peace.” They will eventually know.
Ha. Meem.
By the Enlightening Scripture.
We revealed it on a Blessed Night—We have been warning.
In it, every wise command is made distinct.
A command from Us. We have been sending messages.
As mercy from your Lord. He is the Hearer, the Knower.
Lord of the heavens and the earth and everything between them, if you are certain.
There is no god except He. He gives life, and He causes death. Your Lord and Lord of your earliest ancestors.
Yet they play around in doubt.
So watch for the Day when the sky produces a visible smoke.
Enveloping humanity. This is a painful punishment.
“Our Lord, lift the suffering from us, we are believers.”
How can there be a reminder for them, and an enlightening messenger has come to them.
But they turned away from him, and said, “Educated, but crazy.”
We will postpone the punishment for a while, but you will return.
On the Day when We launch the Great Assault—We will avenge.
We tested the people of Pharaoh before them: a noble messenger came to them.
“Hand over the servants of Allah to me. I am a trustworthy messenger to you.”
And, “Do not exalt yourselves above Allah. I come to you with clear authority.
And I have sought refuge in my Lord and your Lord, lest you condemn me.
But if you do not believe in me, then keep away from me.”
Then he then appealed to his Lord: “These are guilty people.”
“Set out with My servants by night—you will be followed.
And cross the sea quickly—they are an army to be drowned.”
How many gardens and fountains did they leave behind?
And plantations, and splendid residences.
And luxuries they used to enjoy.
So it was. And We passed it on to another people.
Neither heaven nor earth wept over them, nor were they delayed.
And We saved the Children of Israel from the humiliating persecution.
From Pharaoh. He was a tyrant, a transgressor.
And We chose them knowingly over all people.
And We gave them many signs in which was an obvious trial.
Yet these say:
“There is nothing beyond our first death, and we will not be resurrected.
Bring back our ancestors, if you are truthful.”
Are they better, or the people of Tubba and those before them? We annihilated them. They were guilty.
We did not create the heavens and the earth and what is between them in play.
We only created them for a purpose, but most of them do not know.
The Day of Sorting Out is the time appointed for all.
The Day when no friend will avail a friend in any way, and they will not be helped.
Except those on whom Allah has mercy. He is the Powerful, the Merciful.
The Tree of Bitterness.
The food of the sinful.
Like molten lead—boiling inside the bellies.
Like the boiling of seething water.
Seize him and drag him into the depths of Hell.
Then pour over his head the suffering of the Inferno.
Taste! You who were powerful and noble.
This is what you used to doubt.
But the righteous will be in a secure place.
Amid Gardens and springs.
Dressed in fine silk and rich brocade, facing one another.
So it will be. And We will pair them with lovely companions.
In it, they call for every fruit, in serenity.
They will taste no death in it, except the first death. And He will protect them from the suffering of the Blaze.
A grace from your Lord. That is the ultimate success.
We made it easy in your language, so that they may remember.
So be on the watch. They too are on the watch.
Ha. Meem.
The revelation of the Book is from Allah—the Mighty, the Wise.
In the heavens and the earth are proofs for the believers.
And in your own creation, and in the creatures He scattered, are signs for a people who are certain.
And in the alternation of night and day, and in the sustenance Allah sends down from the sky, with which He revives the earth after its death, and in the shifting of the winds, are marvels for people who reason.
These are Allah’s verses which We convey to you in truth. So what message will they believe in after Allah and His revelations?
Woe to every sinful liar.
Who hears Allah's revelations being recited to him, then persists arrogantly, as if he did not hear them. So give him news of a painful punishment.
And when he learns something of Our revelations, he takes them as a joke. For such, there is a humiliating punishment.
Beyond them lies Hell. And what they have earned will not benefit them at all, nor will those they adopted as lords instead of Allah. They will have a terrible punishment.
This is guidance. Those who disbelieve in their Lord’s signs will have a punishment of agonizing pain.
Allah is He who placed the sea at your service, so that ships may sail upon it by His command, and so that you may seek of His bounty, and so that you may give thanks.
And He placed at your service whatever is in the heavens and whatever is on earth—all is from Him. Surely in this are signs for a people who think.
Tell those who believe to forgive those who do not hope for the Days of Allah, so that He will reward people for what they have earned.
Whoever works righteousness: it is for himself. And whoever commits evil: it is against himself. Then to your Lord, you will be returned.
And We gave the Children of Israel the Book, wisdom, and prophethood. And We provided them with good things. And We gave them an advantage over all other people.
And We gave them precise rulings. They fell into dispute only after knowledge came to them, out of envy among themselves. Your Lord will judge between them on the Day of Resurrection regarding the things they differed about.
Then We placed you upon a clear path from the Command, so follow it. So do not follow the inclinations of those who do not know.
They will not avail you against Allah in any way. The wrongdoers are protectors of one another, while Allah is the Protector of the righteous.
These are insight for humanity, and guidance, and mercy for people who are certain.
Do those who indulge in bad deeds assume that We will regard them as equal to those who believe and do good deeds, whether in their life or their death? How wrong is their judgment!
Allah created the heavens and the earth for a purpose—and so that every soul is repaid for what it did. And they will not be wronged.
Have you considered him who took his desires as his god? And Allah led him astray knowingly, and He sealed his hearing and his heart, and He placed a veil over his vision. So who can guide him after Allah? Will you not reflect?
And they say, “There is nothing except our life in this world: we die, and we live, and only time destroys us.” But they have no knowledge of this; they only speculate.
And when Our clarifying Verses are recited to them, their only argument is to say, “Bring back our ancestors, if you are truthful.”
Say, “Allah gives you life, then He makes you die, then He gathers you for the Day of Resurrection, about which there is no doubt. But most people do not know.”
To Allah belongs the Kingdom of the heavens and the earth. On the Day when the Hour takes place. On that Day, the falsifiers will lose.
And you will see every community on its knees. Every community will be summoned to its Book: “Today you are being repaid for what you used to do.
This Book of Ours speaks about you in truth. We were transcribing what you used to do.”
As for those who believed and did righteous deeds, their Lord will admit them into His mercy. That is the clear triumph.
But as for those who disbelieved: “Were My verses not read to you? But you turned arrogant and were guilty people.”
And when it was said, “The promise of Allah is true, and there is no doubt about the hour,” you said, “We do not know what the Hour is; we think it is only speculation; we are not convinced.”
The evils of what they did will become evident to them, and the very thing they ridiculed will haunt them.
And it will be said, “Today, We will ignore you, as you ignored the encounter of this Day of yours. And your housing is the Fire, and you have no helpers.
That is because you took Allah’s revelations for a joke, and the worldly life lured you.” So today, they will not be removed from it, and they cannot make amends.
So praise belongs to Allah—Lord of the heavens, Lord of the earth, Lord of humanity.
And His is the Grandeur in the heavens and the earth. And He is the Majestic, the Wise.
Ha. Meem.
The revelation of the Scripture is from Allah—the Honorable, the Wise.
We did not create the heavens and the earth and what lies between them except with reason, and for a finite period. Yet those who disbelieve turn away from the warnings they receive.
Say, “Have you considered those you call upon besides Allah? Show me which portion of the earth they created. Or do they own a share of the heavens? Bring me a scripture prior to this one, or some shred of knowledge, if you are truthful.”
And who is more misguided than he who calls upon others besides Allah—who cannot respond to him until Resurrection Day? And they are unaware of their prayers.
And when humanity is gathered, they will be enemies to them, and they will renounce their worship of them.
And when Our revelations are recited to them, plain and clear, those who disbelieve say of the truth when it has come to them, “This is obviously magic.”
Or do they say, “He made it up”? Say, “If I made it up, there is nothing you can do to protect me from Allah. He knows well what you are engaged in. He is enough as a witness between me and you. He is the Forgiving, the Merciful.”
Say, “I am no different from the other messengers, nor do I know what will be done with me or with you. I only follow what is inspired in me, and I am only a clear warner.”
Say, “Have you considered, if it is from Allah, and you disbelieve in it, although a witness from the Children of Israel testified to its like, and has believed, while you turned arrogant? Surely Allah does not guide the unjust people.”
Those who disbelieve say to those who believe, “If it were anything good, they would not have preceded us to it.” And since they were not guided by it, they will say, “This is an old lie.”
And before it, the Book of Moses—a guide and mercy. And this is a confirming Book, in the Arabic language, to warn those who do wrong—and good news for the doers of good.
Those who say, “Our Lord is Allah,” then lead a righteous life—they have nothing to fear, nor shall they grieve.
These are the inhabitants of the Garden, where they will remain forever—a reward for what they used to do.
We have instructed the human being to kindness to his parents. His mother carried him with difficulty, and she delivered him with difficulty. His bearing and weaning take thirty months. Until, when he has reached his prime at the age of forty, he says, “My Lord, enable me to appreciate the blessings You have bestowed upon me and upon my parents, and to act with righteousness, pleasing You. And improve my children for me. I have sincerely repented to You, and I am of those who submit.”
Those are they from whom We accept the best of their deeds, and We overlook their misdeeds—among the inhabitants of Paradise—the promise of truth which they are promised.
As for him who says to his parents, “Enough of you! Are you warning me that I will be raised up—when generations before me have passed away?” While they cry to Allah for help, “Woe to you! Believe! The promise of Allah is true!” But he says, “These are nothing but tales of the ancients.”
Those are they upon whom the verdict is justified, among communities that passed away before them, of jinn and humans. They are truly losers.
There are ranks for everyone, according to what they did, and He will repay them for their works in full, and they will not be wronged.
On the Day when the faithless are paraded before the Fire: “You have squandered your good things in your worldly life, and you took pleasure in them. So today you are being repaid with the torment of shame, because of your arrogance on earth with no right, and because you used to sin.”
And mention Aad’s brother, when he warned his people at the dunes. While other warners have passed before him and after him: “Worship none but Allah; I fear for you the punishment of a tremendous Day.”
They said, “Did you come to us to divert us from our gods? Then bring us what you threaten us with—if you are truthful.”
He said, “Knowledge is only with Allah, and I convey to you what I was sent with, but I see that you are ignorant people.”
And when they saw a cloud approaching their valleys, they said, “This is a cloud bringing us rain.” In fact, it is what you were impatient for: a wind in which is grievous suffering.
It will destroy everything by the command of its Lord. And when the morning came upon them, there was nothing to be seen except their dwellings. Thus We repay the criminal people.
We had empowered them in the same way We empowered you. And We gave them hearing, sight, and minds. But neither their hearing, nor their sight, nor their minds availed them in any way. That is because they disregarded Allah’s revelations. And what they used to ridicule surrounded them.
We have destroyed many societies around you, and We diversified the signs, so that they may return.
Then why did the idols, whom they worshiped as means of nearness to Allah, not help them? In fact, they failed them. It was their lie—a fabrication of their own making.
And when We dispatched towards you a number of jinns, listening to the Quran. When they came in its presence, they said, “Pay attention!” Then, when it was concluded, they went back to their people, warning them.
They said, “O, our people! We have heard a Scripture, revealed after Moses, confirming what came before it. It guides to the Truth, and to a straight road.
O, our people! Answer the caller to Allah, and believe in Him, and He will forgive you some of your sins, and He will protect you from a painful punishment.”
Whoever does not answer Allah’s caller will have no escape on earth, and there is no protector for him other than Him. These are in obvious error.
Do they not realize, that Allah, who created the heavens and the earth, and was never tired by creating them, is able to revive the dead? Yes, indeed—He is Capable of everything.
On the Day when those who disbelieved are presented to the Fire: “Is this not real?” They will say, “Yes indeed, by our Lord.” He will say, “Then taste the suffering for having disbelieved.”
So be patient, as the messengers with resolve were patient, and do not be hasty regarding them. On the Day when they witness what they are promised: as if they only stayed for an hour of a day. A proclamation! Will any be destroyed, except the sinful people?
Those who disbelieve and repel from Allah’s path—He nullifies their works.
While those who believe, and work righteousness, and believe in what was sent down to Muhammad—which is the truth from their Lord—He remits their sins, and He relieves their concerns.
That is because those who disbelieve follow falsehoods, while those who believe follow the truth from their Lord. Thus Allah gives the people their examples.
When you encounter those who disbelieve, strike at their necks. Then, when you have subdued them, tighten the bond. Then, either free them graciously, or by ransom. Until the war lays down its burdens. Had Allah willed, He would have taken vengeance upon them, but so that He tests some of you through others. As for those who are killed in Allah’s way, He will not let their deeds go to waste.
He will guide them and improve their condition.
And He will admit them to Paradise, which He has identified to them.
O you who believe! If you stand up for Allah, He will support you, and He will strengthen your foothold.
As for those who disbelieve: for them is perdition, and He will waste their deeds.
That is because they disliked what Allah revealed, so He nullified their works.
Have they not traveled through the earth, and seen the fate of those before them? Allah poured destruction on them—and for the unbelievers is something comparable.
That is because Allah is the Master of those who believe, while the disbelievers have no master.
Allah will admit those who believe and do good deeds into Gardens under which rivers flow. While those who disbelieve enjoy themselves, and they eat as cattle eat; and the Fire will be a dwelling for them.
How many a town was more powerful than your town which evicted you? We destroyed them, and there was no helper for them.
Is he who stands upon evidence from his Lord, like someone whose bad deed is made to appear attractive to him? And they follow their own desires?
The likeness of the Garden promised to the righteous: in it are rivers of pure water, and rivers of milk forever fresh, and rivers of wine delightful to the drinkers, and rivers of strained honey. And they will have in it of every fruit, and forgiveness from their Lord. Like someone remaining in the Fire forever, and are given to drink boiling water, that tears apart their bowels?
And among them are those who listen to you. But when they leave your presence, they say to those given knowledge, “What did he just say?” These are they whose hearts Allah has sealed, and who follow their own desires.
As for those who are guided: He increases them in guidance, and He grants them their reverence.
Are they just waiting for the Hour to take them by surprise? Its tokens have already arrived. But when it has come upon them, what will their remembrance do for them?
Know that there is no god but Allah, and ask forgiveness for your sin, and for the believing men and believing women. Allah knows your movements and your resting-place.
Those who believe say, “If only a chapter was sent down.” Yet when a decisive chapter is sent down, and fighting is mentioned in it, you see those in whose hearts is sickness staring at you like someone fainting at death. More suitable for them.
Obedience and upright speech. Then, when the matter is decided, being true to Allah would have been better for them.
If you turn away, you are likely to make mischief on earth, and sever your family ties.
Those are they whom Allah has condemned. He made them deaf, and He blinded their sight.
Do they not contemplate the Quran? Or do hearts have their locks upon them?
Those who relapsed after guidance became clear to them—Satan has enticed them, and he has given them latitude.
That is because they said to those who hated what Allah revealed, “We will obey you in some issues.” But Allah knows their secret thoughts.
How about when the angels take their souls, beating their faces and their backs?
That is because they pursued what displeases Allah, and they disliked His approval, so He nullified their works.
Or do those in whose hearts is a disease think that Allah will not expose their malice?
Had We willed, We would have shown them to you, and you would have recognized them by their features. And you will recognize them by their tone of speech. And Allah knows your actions.
And We will test you—until We prove those among you who strive, and those who persevere—and We will test your assertions.
Those who disbelieve, and hinder from Allah’s path, and defy the Messenger after guidance became clear to them: they will not harm Allah in the least, but He will render their deeds worthless.
O you who believe! Obey Allah, and obey the Messenger, and let not your deeds go to waste.
Those who disbelieve, and hinder from Allah’s path, and then die as disbelievers: Allah will not forgive them.
So do not waver and call for peace while you have the upper hand. Allah is with you, and He will not deprive you of your efforts.
The life of this world is nothing but play and pastime. But if you believe and are reverent, He will grant you your rewards, and He will not ask you for your possessions.
Were He to ask you for them, and pressure you, you would withhold, and He would expose your unwillingness.
Here you are, being invited to donate in Allah’s cause. Among you are those who withhold. But whoever withholds is withholding against himself. Allah is the Rich, while you are the needy. And if you turn away, He will replace you with another people, and they will not be like you.
We have opened the way for you to a notable victory.
So that Allah may forgive you your sins—past and future—and complete His favor upon you, and guide you along a straight path.
And so that Allah may help you with unwavering support.
It is He who sends down tranquility into the hearts of believers, to add faith to their faith. To Allah belong the Forces of the heavens and the earth, and Allah is Knowing and Wise.
So that He may admit the believers, male and female, into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to remain there forever, and that He may remit their offenses. That, with Allah, is a great triumph.
And so that He may punish the hypocrites, male and female, and the associators, male and female—those who harbor evil thoughts about Allah. They are surrounded by evil, and Allah is angry with them, and has cursed them, and has prepared for them Hell—a miserable destination.
To Allah belong the Forces of the heavens and the earth. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
We sent you as a witness, and a deliverer of good news, and a warner.
So you may believe in Allah and His Messenger, and assist him, and respect him, and praise Him morning and evening.
Those who pledge allegiance to you, are pledging allegiance to Allah. Allah’s hand is above their hands. Whoever breaks his pledge, breaks it against himself. And whosoever fulfills what He promised Allah, He will give him a great reward.
The Nomadic-Arabs, who stayed behind, will say to you, “Our belongings and our families have preoccupied us, so ask forgiveness for us.” They say with their tongues what is not in their hearts. Say, “Who can avail you anything against Allah, if He intends harm for you, or intends benefit for you?” But Allah is well informed of what you do.
But you assumed that the Messenger and the believers would not return to their families, ever, and this seemed fine to your hearts, and you harbored bad thoughts, and you became doomed people.
Whoever does not believe in Allah and His Messenger—We have prepared for the unbelievers a Blaze.
To Allah belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He forgives whom He wills, and He punishes whom He wills. And Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Those who lagged behind will say when you depart to collect the gains, “Let us follow you.” They want to change the Word of Allah. Say, “You will not follow us; Allah has said so before.” Then they will say, “But you are jealous of us.” In fact, they understand only a little.
Say to the Nomadic-Arabs who stayed behind, “You will be called to face a people of great strength. You will fight them—unless they submit. If you obey, Allah will give you a good reward. But if you turn away, as you turned away before, He will punish you a painful punishment.”
There is no blame on the blind, nor any blame on the disabled, nor any blame on the sick. Whoever obeys Allah and His Messenger: He will admit him into Gardens beneath which rivers flow. But whoever turns away: He will punish him a painful punishment.
Allah was pleased with the believers: when they pledged allegiance to you under the tree. He knew what was in their hearts, so He sent down Serenity upon them, and He rewarded them with an imminent conquest.
And abundant gains that they will capture. Allah is Mighty and Wise.
Allah has promised you abundant gains, that you will capture. He has expedited this for you, and He has restrained the people’s hands from you; so that it becomes a sign for the believers, and so that He may guide you to a straight path.
And others of which you were incapable, Allah has surrounded them. Allah is Capable of all things.
If those who disbelieve had fought you, they would have turned their backs, then they would have found neither protector nor helper.
It is the pattern of Allah, ongoing since the past. You will find no change in Allah’s pattern.
It is He Who restrained their hands from you, and your hands from them, in the valley of Mecca, after having given you the upper hand over them. Allah is Observer of whatever you do.
It is they who disbelieved, and barred you from the Sacred Mosque, and prevented the offering from reaching its destination. Were it not for believing men and believing women, whom you did not know, you were about to hurt them, and become guilty unintentionally. Thus Allah admits into His mercy whom He wills. Had they dispersed, We would have punished those who disbelieved among them with a painful punishment.
Those who disbelieve filled their hearts with prejudice—the prejudice of the age of ignorance. But Allah sent down His Tranquility upon His Messenger, and upon the believers, and He made binding on them the words of righteousness—to which they were most entitled and most deserving. Allah is Knower of all things.
Allah has fulfilled His Messenger’s vision in truth: “You will enter the Sacred House, Allah willing, in safety, heads shaven, or hair shortened, not fearing. He knew what you did not know, and has granted besides this an imminent victory.”
It is He who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the Religion of Truth, to make it prevail over all religion. And Allah is enough as Witness.
Muhammad is the Messenger of Allah. Those with him are firm against the unbelievers, yet kind amongst themselves. You see them kneeling, prostrating, seeking Allah’s blessings and His approval. Their marks are on their faces from the effects of prostration. Such is their example in the Torah, and their example in the Gospel: like a seed that sprouts, becomes strong, grows thick, and rises on its stem, delighting the planters. Through them, He infuriates the unbelievers. Allah has promised those among them who believe and do good works forgiveness and a splendid reward.
O you who believe! Do not place your opinions above that of Allah and His Messenger, and be conscious of Allah. Allah is Hearing and Knowing.
O you who believe! Do not raise your voices above the Prophet’s voice, nor speak to him loudly, nor address him in the manner you address one another, lest your works be in vain without you realizing.
Those who lower their voices in the presence of Allah’s Messenger—they are the ones whose hearts Allah has tested for reverence. They will have forgiveness and a great reward.
Those who call you from behind the apartments—most of them do not understand.
Had they been patient until you came out to them, it would have been better for them. And Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O you who believe! If a sinner comes to you with any news, investigate, lest you harm some people out of ignorance, and you become regretful for what you have done.
And know that Allah’s Messenger is among you. Had he obeyed you in many issues, you would have suffered hardship. But Allah has endeared the faith to you, and adorned it in your hearts—and He made disbelief, mischief, and rebellion hateful to you—these are the rightly guided.
A Favor and a Blessing from Allah. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
And if two groups of believers fight each other, reconcile between them. But if one group aggresses against the other, fight the aggressing group until it complies with Allah’s rule. Once it has complied, reconcile between them with justice, and be equitable. Allah loves the equitable.
The believers are brothers, so reconcile between your brothers, and be mindful of Allah, so you may receive mercy.
O you who believe! No people shall ridicule other people, for they may be better than them. Nor shall any women ridicule other women, for they may be better than they. Nor shall you slander one another, nor shall you insult one another with nicknames. Evil is the return to wickedness after having attained faith. Whoever does not repent—these are the wrongdoers.
O you who believe! Avoid most suspicion—some suspicion is sinful. And do not spy, nor backbite one another. Would any of you like to eat his dead brother’s flesh? You would hate it. So reverence Allah. Allah is the Acceptor of Repentance, the Mercy-Giver.
O, people! We created you from a male and a female, and We made you races and tribes, so that you may come to know one another. The best among you before Allah is the most righteous. Allah is Knowing and Aware.
The Nomadic-Arabs say, “We have believed.” Say, “You have not believed; but say, ‘We have submitted,’ for faith has not yet entered your hearts. But if you obey Allah and His Messenger, He will diminish none of your deeds. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.”
The believers are those who believe in Allah and His Messenger—then do not doubt—and strive with their wealth and their lives in Allah’s way. These are the sincere.
Say, “Are you going to teach Allah about your religion, when Allah knows everything in the heavens and on earth, and Allah is Knower of all things?”
They consider their submission a favor to you. Say, “Do not consider your submission a favor to me. It is Allah who has done you a favor, by guiding you to the faith—if you are truthful.”
Allah knows the secrets of the heavens and the earth, and Allah sees whatever you do.
Qaf. By the Glorious Quran.
They marveled that a warner has come to them from among them. The disbelievers say, “This is something strange.
When we have died and become dust? This is a farfetched return.”
We know what the earth consumes of them, and with Us is a comprehensive book.
But they denied the truth when it has come to them, so they are in a state of confusion.
Have they not observed the sky above them: how We constructed it and decorated it, and it has no cracks?
And the earth, how We spread it out, and We set mountains on it, and We made every beautiful pair grow in it?
An observation and a reminder for every repenting worshiper.
And We sent down from the sky blessed water, and We grew with it gardens and grains for harvest.
And the soaring palms, with layered clusters.
As sustenance for the servants. And We revive with it a dead land. Likewise is the emergence.
Before them, the people of Noah denied, as did the dwellers of Russ, and Thamood.
And Aad, and Pharaoh, and the brethren of Lot.
And the Woods-Dwellers, and the people of Tubba. They all rejected the messengers, so My threat was justly fulfilled.
Were We fatigued by the first creation? But they are in doubt about a new creation.
We created the human being, and We know what his soul whispers to him. We are closer to him than his jugular vein.
As the two receivers receive, seated to the right and to the left.
Not a word does he utter, without an observer beside him ready.
And the daze of death has come in truth: “This is what you were trying to evade.”
And the Trumpet is blown: “This is the Promised Day.”
And every soul comes, with it a driver and a witness.
“You were negligent of this, so We lifted your screen from you, and your vision today is sharp.”
And His escort will say, “This is what I have ready.”
“Throw into Hell every stubborn disbeliever.
Preventer of good, aggressor, doubter.
Who fabricated another god with Allah; so toss him into the intense agony.”
His escort will say, “Our Lord, I did not make him rebel, but he was far astray.”
He will say, “Do not feud in My presence—I have warned you in advance.
The word will not be changed with Me, and I am not unjust to the servants.”
On the Day when We say to Hell, “Are you full?” And it says, “Are there any more?”
And Paradise will be brought near for the righteous—not far away.
“This is what you were promised—for every careful penitent.
Who inwardly feared the Compassionate, and came with a repentant heart.
Enter it in peace. This is the Day of Eternity.”
In it, they will have whatever they desire—and with Us is even more.
How many generations before them did We destroy, who were more powerful than they? They explored the lands—was there any escape?
In this is a reminder for whoever possesses a heart, or cares to listen and witness.
We created the heavens and the earth and everything between them in six stages, and no fatigue touched Us.
So endure what they say, and proclaim the praises of your Lord before the rising of the sun, and before sunset.
And glorify Him during the night, and after the prostrations.
And listen for the Day when the Caller calls from a nearby place.
On the Day when they hear the Shout in Truth. This is the Day of Emergence.
It is We Who give life and cause death. And to Us, is the destination.
The Day when the earth breaks open from them quickly. That is an easy gathering for Us.
We are fully aware of what they say, and you are not a dictator over them. So remind with the Quran whoever fears My warning.
By the spreaders spreading.
And by the carriers of loads.
And by those moving gently.
And by the distributors of affairs.
What you are promised is true.
Judgment will take place.
By the sky that is woven.
You differ in what you say.
Averted from it is he who is averted.
Perish the imposters.
Those who are dazed in ignorance.
They ask, “When is Judgment Day?”
The Day they are presented to the Fire.
“Taste your scheme. This is what you used to challenge.”
But the cautious will be in gardens and springs.
Receiving what their Lord has given them. Before this they were virtuous.
They used to sleep a little at night.
And at dawn, they would pray for pardon.
And in their wealth, there was a rightful share for the beggar and the deprived.
And on earth are signs for the convinced.
And within yourselves. Do you not see?
And in heaven is your livelihood, and what you are promised.
By the Lord of the heaven and the earth, it is as true as you can speak.
Did the story of Abraham’s honorable guests reach you?
When they entered his presence, they said, “Peace.” He said, “Peace, strangers.”
Then he slipped away to his family, and came with a fattened calf.
He placed it close to them, and said, “Will you not eat?”
Then he harbored a fear of them. They said, “Do not fear!” And they gave him the good news of a knowledgeable boy.
Then His wife came forward screaming, striking her face, and she said, “A barren old woman?”
They said, “Thus said your Lord. He is the Wise, the Knowing.”
He said, “What is your mission, O envoys?”
They said, “We are sent to a guilty people.”
“To unleash upon them rocks of clay.”
“Marked by your Lord for the excessive.”
So We evacuated all the believers who were in it.
But We found in it only one household of Muslims.
And We left a sign in it for those who fear the painful punishment.
And in Moses, when We sent him to Pharaoh, with compelling proof.
But he turned away with his warlords, and said, “A wizard or a madman.”
So We seized him and his troops, and We threw them into the sea, and He was to blame.
And in Aad, when We unleashed against them the devastating wind.
It spared nothing it came upon—but rendered it like decayed ruins.
And in Thamood, when it was said to them, “Enjoy yourselves for a while.”
But they defied the command of their Lord, so the thunderbolt struck them as they looked on.
They were unable to rise, nor could they help one another.
And before that, the people of Noah. They were immoral people.
We constructed the universe with power, and We are expanding it.
And the earth—We spread it out—how well We prepared it!
And of all things, We created two mates, so that you may reflect and ponder.
“So flee towards Allah. I am to you from Him a clear warner.”
“And do not set up another god with Allah. I am to you from Him a clear warner.”
Likewise, no messenger came to those before them, but they said, “A magician or a madman.”
Did they recommend it to one another? In fact, they are tyrannical people.
So turn away from them; you are not to blame.
And remind, as the reminder benefits the believers.
I did not create jinn and humans except to worship Me.
I need no livelihood from them, nor do I need them to feed Me.
Allah is the Provider, the Possessor of Strength, the Firm.
Those who do wrong will have their turn, like the turn of their counterparts, so let them not rush Me.
So woe to those who disbelieve from their day which they are promised.
By the Mount.
And a Book inscribed.
In a published scroll.
And the frequented House.
And the elevated roof.
And the seething sea.
Your Lord’s punishment will occur.
There is none to prevent it.
On the Day when the sky sways in agitation.
And the mountains go into motion.
Woe on that Day to the deniers.
Those who play with speculation.
The Day when they are shoved forcefully into the Fire of Gehenna.
“This is the Fire that you used to deny.
Is this magic, or do you not see?
Burn in it. Be patient, or impatient, it is the same for you. You are only being penalized for what you used to do.”
The righteous will be amid Gardens and bliss.
Enjoying what their Lord has given them, and their Lord has spared them the suffering of Hell.
Eat and drink joyfully, because of what you used to do.
Relaxing on arrayed furniture, We will couple them with gorgeous spouses.
Those who believed and whose descendants followed them in faith: We will unite them with their descendants, and We will not deprive them of any of their works. Every person is a hostage to what he has earned.
And We will supply them with fruit, and meat, as they desire.
They will pass around a cup which leads to no-nonsense, nor sinfulness.
Circulating among them to serve them will be youths, like hidden pearls.
They will approach one another, inquiring.
They will say, “Before this, we were fearful for our families.
But Allah has blessed us, and He spared us the suffering of the Fiery Winds.
Before this, we used to pray to Him. He is the Good, the Merciful.”
So remind. By the grace of your Lord, you are neither an oracle nor a madman.
Or do they say, “A poet—we anticipate for him a calamity of time.”
Say, “Go on waiting; I am waiting with you.”
Or is it their dreams compelling them to this? Or are they transgressing people?
Or do they say, “He made it up”? In fact, they have no faith.
So let them produce a discourse like it—if they are truthful.
Or were they created from nothing? Or are they the creators?
Or did they create the heavens and the earth? In fact, they are not certain.
Or do they possess the treasuries of your Lord? Or are they the controllers?
Or do they have a stairway by means of which they listen? Then let their listener produce a clear proof.
Or for Him the daughters, and for you the sons?
Or do you demand payment from them, and they are burdened by debt?
Or do they know the future, and they write it down?
Or are they plotting a conspiracy? The conspiracy will fall back on the unbelievers.
Or do they have a god other than Allah? Glory be to Allah, above the partners they ascribe.
And were they to see a piece of the sky falling, they would say, “A heap of clouds.”
So leave them until they meet their Day when they will be stunned.
The Day when their ploys will avail them nothing, and they will not be helped.
For those who do wrong, there is a punishment besides that, but most of them do not know.
So patiently await your Lord’s decision—you are before Our Eyes. And proclaim your Lord’s praises when you arise.
And glorify Him during the night, and at the receding of the stars.
By the star, as it falls.
Your friend has not strayed, nor has he erred.
Nor does he speak out of desire.
It is, but a revealed revelation.
Taught to him by the Extremely Powerful.
Possessor of vigor. He settled.
While he was at the highest horizon.
Then he drew near, and He hovered around.
He was within two bows’ length, or closer.
Then He revealed to His servant what He revealed.
The heart did not lie about what he saw.
Will you dispute with him concerning what he saw?
He saw him in another descent.
At the Lote Tree of Extremity.
Near which is the Garden of Refuge.
As there covered the Lotus Tree what covered it.
The sight did not waver, nor did it overreach.
He saw some of the Great Signs of his Lord.
Have you considered al-Lat and al-Uzza?
And Manat, the third one, the other?
Are you to have the males, and He the females?
What a bizarre distribution.
These are nothing but names, which you have invented, you and your forefathers—a practice Allah has never authorized. They follow nothing but assumptions, and what the ego desires, although guidance has come to them from their Lord.
Or is the human being to have whatever he desires?
To Allah belong the Last and the First.
How many an angel is there in the heavens whose intercession avails nothing, except after Allah gives permission to whomever He wills, and approves?
Those who do not believe in the Hereafter name the angels with female names.
They have no knowledge of it. They follow nothing but assumptions, and assumptions are no substitute for the truth.
So avoid whoever has turned away from Our remembrance, and desires nothing but the present life.
That is the extent of their knowledge. Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path, and He knows best who has accepted guidance.
To Allah belongs whatever is in Heaven and whatever is on Earth. He will penalize those who commit evil according to their deeds. And He will reward those who do good with the best.
Those who avoid major sins and indecencies—except what is slight—your Lord is of Vast Forgiveness. He knew you well, ever since He produced you from the earth, and ever since you were embryos in your mothers’ wombs. So do not acclaim your own virtue; He is fully aware of the righteous.
Have you considered him who turned away?
And gave a little, and then withheld?
Does he possess knowledge of the unseen, and can therefore foresee?
Or was he not informed of what is in the Scrolls of Moses?
And of Abraham, who fulfilled?
That no bearer of burdens bears the burdens of another.
And that the human being attains only what he strives for.
And that his efforts will be witnessed.
Then he will be rewarded for it with the fullest reward.
And that to your Lord is the finality.
And that it is He who causes laughter and weeping.
And that it is He who causes death and gives life.
And that it is He who created the two types—the male and the female.
From a drop when ejected.
And that upon Him lies the second genesis.
And that it is He who enriches and impoverishes.
And that it is He who is Lord of Sirius.
And that it is He who destroyed Aad the Former.
And Thamood, sparing none.
And the people of Noah aforetime; for they were most unjust and most oppressive.
And He razed the overthrown cities.
And He covered them with whatever covered them.
So which of your Lord's marvels will you deny?
This is a warning, just like the previous warnings.
The imminent has drawn near.
None besides Allah can unveil it.
Do you marvel at this discourse?
And laugh, and do not weep?
Lost in your frivolity?
So bow down to Allah—and worship!
The Hour has drawn near, and the moon has split.
Yet whenever they see a sign, they turn away, and say, “Continuous magic.”
They lied and followed their desires, but everything has its time.
And there came to them news containing deterrent.
Profound wisdom—but warnings are of no avail.
So turn away from them. On the Day when the Caller calls to something terrible.
Their eyes downcast, they will emerge from the graves, as if they were swarming locusts.
Scrambling towards the Caller. The unbelievers will say, “This is a difficult Day.”
The people of Noah denied before them. They rejected Our servant, and said, “Possessed!,” and he was intimidated.
So he appealed to his Lord, “I am overwhelmed, so help me.”
So We opened the gates of heaven, with water pouring down.
And We made the earth burst with springs, and the waters joined for a purpose already destined.
And We carried him on a craft of planks and nails.
Sailing before Our eyes—a reward for him who was rejected.
And We left it as a sign. Is there anyone who would be mindful?
So how were My punishment and My warnings?
We made the Quran easy to learn. Is there anyone who would learn?
Aad denied the truth. So how were My punishment and My warnings?
We unleashed upon them a screaming wind, on a day of unrelenting misery.
Plucking people away, as if they were uprooted palm trunks.
So how were My punishment and My warnings?
We made the Quran easy to remember. Is there anyone who would remember?
Thamood rejected the warnings.
They said, “Shall we follow a single human being from among us? Then we would be misguided and insane.
Was the message given to him, out of all of us? In fact, he is a wicked liar.”
They will know tomorrow who the wicked liar is.
We are sending the female camel as a test for them. So watch them, and be patient.
And inform them that the water is to be divided among them—each share of drink equitably proportioned.
But they called their friend, and he dared, and he slaughtered.
So how were My punishment and My warnings?
We sent against them a single Scream, and they were like crushed hay.
We made the Quran easy to understand. Is there anyone who would understand?
The people of Lot denied the warnings.
We unleashed on them a shower of stones, except for Lot’s family; We rescued them at dawn.
As a blessing from Us. Thus We reward the thankful.
And he had warned them of Our onslaught, but they dismissed the warnings.
They even lusted for his guest, so We obliterated their eyes. “So taste My punishment and My warnings.”
Early morning brought upon them lasting punishment.
So taste My punishment and My warnings.
We made the Quran easy to memorize. Is there anyone who would memorize?
The warnings also came to the people of Pharaoh.
They denied Our signs, all of them. So We seized them with the seizure of an Almighty Omnipotent.
Are your unbelievers better than these? Or do you have some exemption in the scriptures?
Or do they say, “We are united, and we will be victorious”?
The multitude will be defeated, and they will turn their backs.
The Hour is their appointed time—the Hour is most catastrophic and most bitter.
The guilty are in confusion and madness.
On the Day when they are dragged into the Fire on their faces: “Taste the touch of Saqar.”
Everything We created is in precise measure.
And Our command is only once, like the blink of an eye.
And We have destroyed the likes of you. Is there anyone who would ponder?
Everything they have done is in the Records.
Everything, small and big, is written down.
The righteous will be amidst Gardens and rivers.
In an assembly of truth, in the presence of an Omnipotent King.
The Compassionate.
Has taught the Quran.
He created the human being.
And taught him clear expression.
The sun and the moon—by calculations.
And the stars and the trees prostrate.
And the sky, He raised. And He set up the balance.
So do not transgress in the balance.
But maintain the weights with justice. And do not violate the balance.
And the earth—He set it up for the creatures.
In it are fruits and date-palms in clusters.
And grains in the blades, and fragrant plants.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
He created the human being from hard clay, like bricks.
And He created the jinn from a fusion of fire.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Lord of the two sunrises and Lord of the two sunsets.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
He merged the two bodies of water, converging together.
Between them is a barrier that they do not overrun.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
From them emerge pearls and coral.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
His are the ships, raised above the sea like landmarks.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Everyone on it is perishing.
But will remain the Presence of your Lord, Full of Majesty and Splendor.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Everyone in the heavens and the earth asks Him. Every day He is managing.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
We will attend to you, O burdensome two.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
O society of jinn and humans! If you can penetrate beyond the realms of the heavens and the earth, go ahead and penetrate. But you cannot penetrate except with authorization.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
You will be bombarded with flares of fire and brass, and you will not succeed.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
When the sky splits apart, and it becomes a rose, like paint.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
On that day, no human and no jinn will be asked about his sin.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
The guilty will be recognized by their marks; they will be seized by the forelocks and the feet.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
This is Hell that the criminals denied.
They circulate between it and between a seething bath.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
But for anyone who feared his Lord’s position, there are two Gardens.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Full of varieties.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
In them are two flowing springs.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
In them are fruits of every kind, in pairs.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Reclining on furnishings lined with brocade, and the fruits of the two Gardens are near at hand.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
In them are maidens of modest gaze, untouched before by any human or jinn.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
As though they were rubies and corals.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Is the reward of goodness anything except goodness?
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
And beyond them are two Gardens.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Deep green.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
In them are two gushing springs.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
In them are fruits, and date-palms, and pomegranates.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
In them are good and beautiful ones.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Companions, secluded in the pavilions.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Whom no human has touched before, nor Jinn.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Reclining on green cushions, and exquisite wonders.
So which of your Lord’s marvels will you deny?
Blessed is the Name of your Lord, Full of Majesty and Nobility.
When the Inevitable occurs.
Of its occurrence, there is no denial.
Bringing low, raising high.
When the earth is shaken with a shock.
And the mountains are crushed and crumbled.
And become scattered dust.
And you become three classes.
Those on the Right—what of those on the Right?
And those on the Left—what of those on the Left?
And the forerunners, the forerunners.
These are the nearest.
In the Gardens of Bliss.
A group from the ancients.
And a few from the latecomers.
On jeweled thrones.
Reclining on them, facing one another.
Circulating among them will be eternalized youth.
With goblets, pitchers, and a cup from a flowing spring.
Causing them neither headache nor intoxication.
And fruits of their choice.
And the meat of birds as they desire.
And lovely companions.
The likenesses of pristine pearls.
A reward for what they used to do.
In it they will hear no nonsense and no accusations.
But only the greeting: “Peace, peace.”
And those on the Right—what of those on the Right?
In lush orchards.
And sweet-smelling plants.
And extended shade.
And outpouring water.
And abundant fruit.
Never out of season, and never forbidden.
And elevated mattresses.
We created them of unique creation.
And made them virgins.
Tender and un-aging.
For those on the Right.
Many from those of old.
And many from the latecomers.
And those on the Left—what of those on the Left?
Amid scorching wind and boiling water.
And a shade of black smoke.
Neither cool nor refreshing.
Before that, they lived in luxury.
And they persisted in immense wrongdoing.
And they used to say, “When we are dead and become dust and bones, are we to be resurrected?
And our ancestors of old?”
Say, “Those of old and those of later times.
Will be gathered for the appointment of a familiar Day.”
Then you, O misguided deniers.
Will be eating from the Tree of Bitterness.
Will be filling your bellies with it.
Will be drinking on top of it boiling water.
Drinking as parched camels drink.
This is their hospitality on the Day of Retribution.
We created you—if only you would believe!
Have you seen what you ejaculate?
Is it you who create it, or are We the Creators?
We mandated death among you, and We will not be surpassed.
In replacing you with your likes, and transforming you into what you do not know.
You have known the first formation. Then why do you not reflect?
Have you seen what you cultivate?
Is it you who sow it, or are We the Sowers?
If We will, We can turn it into rubble; then you will lament.
“We are penalized.
No—we have been deprived.”
Have you seen the water that you drink?
Is it you who sent it down from the clouds, or are We the senders?
If We will, We can make it bitter. So why are you not thankful?
Have you seen the fire you kindle?
Is it you who produce its tree, or are We the Producers?
We made it a reminder, and comfort for the users.
So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Great.
I swear by the positions of the stars.
And it is a tremendous oath—if you only knew.
It is a Noble Quran.
In a well-protected Book.
None can grasp it except the purified.
A revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.
Is it this discourse that you take so lightly?
And you make it your livelihood to deny it?
So when it has reached the throat.
While you are looking on.
We are closer to it than you are, but you cannot see.
Why, then, if you are unconstrained.
You do not bring it back, if you are truthful?
But if he is one of those brought near.
Then happiness, and fragrance, and Garden of Delights.
And if he is among those on the Right.
Then, “Peace upon you,” from those on the Right.
But if he is among the deniers, the mistaken.
Then a welcome of Inferno.
And burning in Hell.
This is the absolute truth.
So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Magnificent.
Whatsoever is in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. And He is the Mighty, the Wise.
To Him belongs the kingdom of the heavens and the earth. He gives life and causes death, and He has Power over everything.
He is the First and the Last, and the Outer and the Inner, and He has knowledge of all things.
It is He who created the heavens and the earth in six stages, then settled on the Throne. He knows what penetrates into the earth, and what comes out of it, and what descends from the sky, and what ascends to it. And He is with you wherever you may be. And Allah sees whatever you do.
To Him belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. And to Allah, all matters are returned.
He merges the night into the day, and He merges the day into the night. And He knows what the hearts contain.
Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and donate from what He has entrusted you with. Those among you who believe and donate will have a great reward.
And what is the matter with you, that you don’t believe in Allah, while the Messenger is calling you to believe in your Lord, and He received a pledge from you—if you are believers?
It is He who sends down clear revelations upon His servant, to bring you out of darkness into light. And Allah is Kind towards you, Most Merciful.
And what is the matter with you, that you do not spend in Allah’s way—when to Allah belongs the inheritance of the heavens and the earth? Not equal among you are those who spent and fought before the conquest. These are higher in rank than those who spent and fought afterward. But Allah has promised each goodness. Allah is Aware of whatever you do.
And who is he who will lend Allah a loan of goodness, so that He multiplies it for him, and there is a generous reward for him?
On the Day when you see the believing men and believing women—their light shining ahead of them, and to their right: “Good news for you today: gardens beneath which rivers flow, remaining in there forever. This is the ultimate success.”
On the Day when the hypocrite men and the hypocrite women say to those who believed, “Wait for us; let us absorb some of your light.” It will be said, “Go back behind you, and seek a light.” A wall will be raised between them, in which is a door; within it is mercy, and outside it is agony.
They will call to them, “Were we not with you?” They will say, “Yes, but you cheated your souls, and waited, and doubted, and became deluded by wishful thinking—until the command of Allah arrived—and the Deceiver deceived you about Allah.”
“So today, no ransom will be accepted from you, nor from those who disbelieved. Your housing is the Fire. It is most worthy of you—what a miserable destination!”
Is it not the time for those who believe to surrender their hearts to Allah’s remembrance, and to the truth that has come down, and not be like those who were given the Scripture before, but time became prolonged for them, so their hearts hardened, and many of them are sinful?
Know that Allah revives the earth after its death. We made the signs clear for you, so you may understand.
Charitable men and charitable women, who have loaned Allah a good loan—it will be multiplied for them, and for them is a generous reward.
Those who believe in Allah and His messengers—it is they who are the truthful and the witnesses before their Lord. They have their reward and their light. As for those who disbelieve and deny Our revelations—these are the inhabitants of the Blaze.
Know that the worldly life is but play, and distraction, and glitter, and boasting among you, and rivalry in wealth and children— the likeness of rainfall that produces plants and delights the disbelievers. But then it withers, and you see it yellowing, and then it becomes debris. And in the Hereafter, there is severe agony, and forgiveness from Allah, and acceptance. The life of this world is nothing but the enjoyment of delusion.
Race to forgiveness from your Lord, and a Garden as vast as the heavens and the earth, prepared for those who believe in Allah and His messengers. That is the grace of Allah, He bestows it on whomever He wills. And Allah has Immense Grace.
No calamity occurs on earth, or within yourselves, unless it is in a Book, even before We make it happen. That is easy for Allah.
So that you may not sorrow over what eludes you, nor exult in what He has given you. Allah does not love the proud snob.
Those who are stingy, and direct people to stinginess. Whoever turns away—Allah is the Independent, the Praiseworthy.
We sent Our messengers with clear proofs, and We sent down with them the Scripture and the Balance, so that people would uphold justice. And We sent down iron: in which is a violent force, and benefits for humanity. So that Allah may know those who will support Him and His messenger in secret. Allah is Strong and Powerful.
We sent Noah and Abraham, and We established in their line Prophethood and Scripture. Some of them are guided, but many of them are sinners.
Then We sent Our messengers to follow in their footsteps. And We followed up with Jesus son of Mary, and We gave him the Gospel. And We instilled in the hearts of those who followed him compassion and mercy. But as for the monasticism which they invented—We did not mandate it to them—only to seek Allah’s approval. But they did not observe it with its due observance. So We gave those among them who believed their reward, but many of them are sinful.
O you who believe! Be conscious of Allah, and believe in His Messenger: He will give you a double portion of His mercy, and He will give you a light, by which you walk, and He will forgive you. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
So that the People of the Scripture may know that they have no control whatsoever over Allah’s grace, and that all grace is in Allah’s hand. He gives it to whomever He wills. And Allah has enormous grace.
Allah has heard the statement of she who argued with you about her husband, as she complained to Allah. And Allah heard your conversation. Allah is Hearing and Seeing.
Those among you who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers—they are not their mothers. None are their mothers except those who gave birth to them. What they say is wrong, and a blatant lie. But Allah is Pardoning, Forgiving.
Those who estrange their wives by equating them with their mothers, then go back on what they said, must set free a slave before they may touch one another. To that, you are counseled. Allah is aware of what you do.
But whoever cannot find the means must fast for two consecutive months before they may touch one another. But if he is unable, then the feeding of sixty needy people. This is to affirm your faith in Allah and His Messenger. These are the limits set by Allah. And the unbelievers will have a painful punishment.
Those who oppose Allah and His Messenger will be subdued, just like those before them were subdued. We have revealed explicit messages, and the unbelievers will have a demeaning punishment.
On the Day when Allah resurrects them all together, and He informs them of what they did. Allah has kept count of it, but they have forgotten it. Allah is Witness over all things.
Do you not realize that Allah knows everything in the heavens and everything on earth? There is no secret conversation between three, but He is their fourth; nor between five, but He is their sixth; nor less than that, nor more, but He is with them wherever they may be. Then, on the Day of Resurrection, He will inform them of what they did. Allah has knowledge of all things.
Have you not noticed those who were prohibited from conspiring secretly, but then reverted to what they were prohibited from? They conspire to commit wrongdoing, aggression, and disobedience of the Messenger. And when they come to you, they greet you with a greeting Allah never greeted you with. And they say within themselves, “Why does Allah not punish us for what we say?” Hell is enough for them. They will roast in it. What a miserable destination.
O you who believe! When you converse privately, do not converse in wrongdoing, aggression, or disobedience of the Messenger; but converse in virtue and piety. And fear Allah, to Whom you will be gathered.
Conspiracies are from Satan, so that he may dishearten those who believe. But he cannot harm them whatsoever, except with Allah’s permission. So in Allah, let the believers put their trust.
O you who believe! When you are told to make room in gatherings, make room; Allah will make room for you. And when you are told to disperse, disperse. Allah elevates those among you who believe and those given knowledge, many steps. And Allah is Aware of what you do.
O you who believe! When you consult the Messenger privately, give something in charity before your consultation. That is better for you, and purer. But if you lack the means—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Are you reluctant to offer charity before your private consultations? Since you are unable to do so, and Allah has pardoned you, then perform the prayers, and give charitable gifts, and obey Allah and His Messenger. Allah is Aware of what you do.
Have you considered those who befriend a people with whom Allah has become angry? They are not of you, nor of them. And they knowingly swear to lies.
Allah has prepared for them a terrible punishment. Evil is what they used to do.
They took their oaths as a cover-up, and they prevented others from Allah’s path. They will have a humiliating punishment.
Neither their wealth nor their children will avail them anything against Allah. These are the residents of the Fire, where they will remain forever.
On the Day when Allah will resurrect them all. They will swear to Him, as they swear to you, thinking that they are upon something. They themselves are the liars.
Satan has taken hold of them, and so has caused them to forget the remembrance of Allah. These are the partisans of Satan. Unquestionably, it is Satan’s partisans who are the losers.
Those who oppose Allah and His Messenger are among the lowliest.
Allah has written: “I will certainly prevail, I and My messengers.” Allah is Strong, Mighty.
You will not find a people who believe in Allah and the Last Day, loving those who oppose Allah and His Messenger, even if they were their parents, or their children, or their siblings, or their close relatives. These: He has instilled faith in their hearts, and He has supported them with a Spirit from Him. And He will admit them into Gardens under which rivers flow, where they will dwell forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. These are the partisans of Allah. Unquestionably, it is Allah’s partisans who are the successful.
Glorifying Allah is all that exists in the heavens and the earth. He is the Powerful, the Wise.
It is He who evicted those who disbelieved among the People of the Scripture from their homes at the first mobilization. You never thought they would leave, and they thought their strongholds would protect them from Allah. But Allah came at them from where they never expected, and He threw panic into their hearts. They wrecked their homes with their own hands, and by the hands of the believers. So take a lesson, O you who have insight.
Had Allah not decreed evacuation for them, He would have punished them in this life. And in the Hereafter, they will have the suffering of the Fire.
That is because they opposed Allah and His Messenger. Whoever opposes Allah—Allah is severe in retribution.
Whatever palm-trees you cut down, or left it standing on its roots, it is by Allah’s will. So that He may disgrace the disobedient.
As for the gains Allah has turned over to His Messenger from them—you spurred neither horse nor camel for them. But Allah gives authority to His messengers over whomever He wills, and Allah is capable of all things.
As for gains granted by Allah to His Messenger from the villages' inhabitants, they are for Allah and His Messenger, and the relatives, and the orphans, and the poor, and the homeless; so that it may not circulate between the wealthy among you. Whatever the Messenger gives you, accept it. And whatever he forbids you, abstain from it. And be mindful of Allah. Allah is severe in punishment.
For the poor refugees who were expelled from their homes and their property, seeking bounty and approval from Allah, and standing up for Allah and His Messenger. These are the truthful.
As for those who had settled in the homeland before them, and had accepted faith—they love those who emigrated to them, and they find no hesitation in their hearts in helping them. They give them preference over themselves, even if they themselves are needy. Whoever is protected from his own selfishness—it is they who are the successful.
And those who came after them, saying, “Our Lord, forgive us, and our fellow believers who have preceded us in faith, and leave no bitterness in our hearts towards those who believe. Our Lord, You are Clement and Merciful.”
Have you not seen those who act hypocritically? They say to their fellow disbelievers among the People of the Scripture, “If you are expelled, we will leave with you, and We will never obey anyone against you. And if you are fought against, we will support you.” But Allah bears witness that they are liars.
If they are expelled, they will not leave with them. And if they are fought against, they will not support them. And if they go to their aid, they will turn their backs and flee. And they will be left without help.
Fear of you is more intense in their hearts than fear of Allah. That is because they are a people who do not understand.
They will not fight you all together, except from fortified strongholds, or from behind walls. Their hostility towards each other is severe. You think they are united, but their hearts are divided. That is because they are a people who do not reason.
Like those shortly before them. They tasted the consequences of their decisions. For them is a painful punishment.
Like Satan, when he says to the human being, “Disbelieve.” But when he has disbelieved, he says, “I am innocent of you; I fear Allah, Lord of the Worlds.”
The ultimate end for both is the Fire, where they will dwell forever. That is the penalty of the wrongdoers.
O you who believe! Fear Allah, and let every soul consider what it has forwarded for tomorrow, and be conscious of Allah. Allah is well informed of what you do.
And be not like those who forgot Allah, so He made them forget themselves. These are the sinners.
Not equal are the inhabitants of the Fire and the inhabitants of Paradise. It is the inhabitants of Paradise who are the winners.
Had We made this Quran descend on a mountain, you would have seen it trembling, crumbling in awe of Allah. These parables We cite for the people, so that they may reflect.
He is Allah—other than Whom there is no god, Knower of secrets and declarations. He is the Compassionate, the Merciful.
He is Allah—besides Whom there is no god, the Sovereign, the Holy, the Peace-Giver, the Faith-Giver, the Overseer, the Almighty, the Omnipotent, the Proud. Glorified is Allah, beyond what they associate.
He is Allah—the Creator, the Inventor, the Designer. His are the Most Beautiful Names. Whatever is in the heavens and the earth praises Him. And He is the Majestic, the Wise.
O you who believe! Do not take My enemies and your enemies for allies, offering them affection, when they have rejected the truth that has come to you. They have expelled the Messenger, and you, because you believed in Allah, your Lord. If you have mobilized to strive for My cause, seeking My approval, how can you show them affection in secret? I know what you conceal and what you disclose. Whoever among you does that has strayed from the right way.
If they gain dominance over you, they would treat you as enemies, and unleash their hands and their tongues to hurt you. And they wish you would disbelieve.
Your family relations and your children will not benefit you on the Day of Resurrection; He will separate between you. And Allah is Observant of what you do.
There is an excellent example for you in Abraham and those with him, when they said to their people, “We are quit of you and of what you worship apart from Allah. We have denounced you, and enmity and hatred have arisen between us and you, forever, until you believe in Allah alone.” Except for Abraham’s word to his father, “I will ask forgiveness for you, although I have no power to avail you anything from Allah.” “Our Lord, in You we trust; and to You, we repent; and to You, is the journey’s end.
Our Lord, do not make us a target for those who disbelieve—and forgive us, our Lord. You are the Almighty, the Wise.”
There is an excellent example in them for you—for whoever hopes for Allah and the Last Day. But whoever turns away—Allah is the Self-Sufficient, the Most Praised.
Perhaps Allah will plant affection between you and those of them you consider enemies. Allah is Capable. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
As for those who did not fight you because of your faith, nor expelled you from your homes: Allah does not prohibit you from dealing kindly and equitably with them. Allah loves the equitable.
But Allah prohibits you from befriending those who fought against you over your faith, expelled you from your homes, or aided in your expulsion. Whoever befriends them: these are the wrongdoers.
O you who believe! When believing women come to you emigrating, test them. Allah is Aware of their faith. And if you find them to be believers, do not send them back to the unbelievers. They are not lawful for them, nor are they lawful for them. But repay them what they had spent. You are not at fault if you marry them, provided you give them their dues. And do not hold to ties of unbelieving women, but demand what you had spent, and let them demand what they had spent. This is the rule of Allah—He judges between you. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
And if any of your wives desert you to the unbelievers, and you decide to penalize them, give those whose wives have gone away the equivalent of what they had spent. And fear Allah, in Whom you are believers.
O prophet! When believing women come to you, pledging allegiance to you, that they will associate nothing with Allah, nor steal, nor commit adultery, nor kill their children, nor commit perjury as to parenthood, nor disobey you in anything righteous, accept their allegiance, and ask Allah for their forgiveness. Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O you who believe! Do not befriend a people with whom Allah has become angry, and have despaired of the Hereafter, as the faithless have despaired of the occupants of the graves.
Whatsoever is in the heavens and whatsoever is on earth praises Allah. He is the Almighty, the Wise.
O you who believe! Why do you say what you do not do?
It is most hateful to Allah that you say what you do not do.
Allah loves those who fight in His way, in ranks, as if they were a solid structure.
When Moses said to his people, “O my people, why do you hurt me, although you know that I am Allah’s Messenger to you?” And when they deviated, Allah deviated their hearts. Allah does not guide the sinful people.
And when Jesus son of Mary said, “O Children of Israel, I am Allah’s Messenger to you, confirming what preceded me of the Torah, and bringing the good news of a Messenger who will come after me, whose name is Ahmad.” But when he brought them the miracles, they said, “This is obvious magic.”
And who is more unjust than he who attributes falsehoods to Allah, while he is being called to Submission? Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
They want to extinguish Allah’s Light with their mouths, but Allah will complete His Light, even though the disbelievers hate it.
It is He who sent His Messenger with the guidance and the Religion of Truth, to make it prevail over all religion, even though the associators hate it.
O you who believe! Shall I direct you to a trade that will save you from a painful punishment?
Believe in Allah and His Messenger, and you strive in Allah’s path with your wealth and yourselves. That is best for you—if you only knew.
He will forgive you your sins, and He will admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow, and into beautiful mansions in the Gardens of Eternity. That is the supreme success.
And another thing you love: support from Allah, and imminent victory. So give good news to the believers.
O you who believe! Stand up for Allah, as Jesus son of Mary said to the disciples, “Who will stand up with me for Allah?” The disciples said, “We will stand up for Allah.” Then a faction of the Children of Israel believed, while another faction disbelieved. And We supported those who believed against their enemies, and they became dominant.
Everything in the heavens and the earth praises Allah—the Sovereign, the Holy, the Almighty, the Wise.
It is He who sent among the unlettered a messenger from among themselves; reciting to them His revelations, and purifying them, and teaching them the Scripture and Wisdom; although they were previously clearly misguided.
And others among them, who have not yet joined them. He is the Glorious, the Wise.
That is Allah’s grace, which He gives to whom He wills. Allah is Lord of infinite grace.
The example of those who were entrusted with the Torah, but failed to uphold it, is that of a donkey carrying volumes of knowledge. Terrible is the example of the people who reject Allah’s signs. Allah does not guide the wrongdoing people.
Say, “O you who follow Judaism! If you claim to be the friends of Allah, to the exclusion of the rest of humanity, then wish for death, if what you say is true.”
But they will not wish for it, ever, because of what their hands have done. And Allah knows the wrongdoers.
Say, “The death from which you are fleeing will meet you. Then you will be returned to the Knower of the unknown and the known, and He will inform you of what you used to do.”
O you who believe! When you are called to the congregational prayer, proceed to Allah’s remembrance, and drop all business. That is better for you—if you only knew.
Then, when the prayer is concluded, disperse throughout the land, and seek Allah’s bounty, and remember Allah often, so that you may prosper.
Yet whenever they come across some business or some entertainment, they scramble towards it, and they leave you standing. Say, “What is with Allah is better than entertainment and business, and Allah is the Best of providers.”
When the hypocrites come to you, they say, “We testify that you are Allah’s Messenger.” Yet Allah knows that you are His Messenger, and Allah testifies that the hypocrites are liars.
They have taken their oaths as a shield, hindering others from Allah’s path. Evil is what they do.
That is because they believed and then disbelieved. So a seal was set upon their hearts, so they do not understand.
And when you see them, their appearance impresses you. And when they speak, you listen to what they say. They are like propped-up timber. They think that every shout is aimed at them. They are the enemy, so beware of them. Allah destroy them; how deluded they are!
And when it is said to them, “Come, the Messenger of Allah will ask forgiveness for you,” they turn their heads, and you see them turning away arrogantly.
It is the same for them, whether you ask forgiveness for them, or you do not ask forgiveness for them, Allah will not forgive them. Allah does not guide the disobedient people.
It is they who say: “Do not spend on those who are with Allah’s Messenger, unless they have dispersed.” Yet to Allah belong the treasuries of the heavens and the earth, but the hypocrites do not comprehend.
They say, “If we return to Medina, the stronger will expel the weaker therefrom.” Yet might belongs to Allah, His Messenger, and the believers, but the hypocrites do not know.
O you who believe! Let neither your possessions nor your children divert you from Allah’s remembrance. Whoever does that—these are the losers.
And donate from what We have provided for you—before death approaches one of you, and he says, “My Lord: if only You would postpone me for a short while, so that I may be charitable, and be of the righteous.”
But Allah will not postpone a soul when its appointed time has come. And Allah is Aware of whatever you do.
Everything in the heavens and the earth glorifies Allah. His is the Sovereignty, and His is the praise, and He is capable of everything.
It is He who created you. Among you are unbelievers, and among you are believers. And Allah sees whatever you do.
He created the heavens and the earth with truth, and He designed you, and He perfected your design, and to Him is the final return.
He knows everything in the heavens and on earth, and He knows what you hide and what you disclose. And Allah knows what is within the hearts.
Have the stories not reached you, of those who disbelieved before? They tasted the ill consequences of their conduct, and they will have a painful punishment.
That is because their messengers came to them with clear evidence, but they said, “Are humans going to guide us?” So they disbelieved and turned away, but Allah is in no need. Allah is Independent and Praiseworthy.
Those who disbelieve claim that they will not be resurrected. Say, “Yes indeed, by my Lord, you will be resurrected, then you will be informed of everything you did. And that is easy for Allah.”
So believe in Allah and His Messenger, and in the Light that We revealed. And Allah is Aware of everything you do.
On the Day when He gathers you for the Day of Gathering—that is the Day of Mutual Exchange. Whoever believes in Allah and acts with integrity, He will remit his misdeeds, and will admit him into gardens beneath which rivers flow, remaining there forever. That is the supreme achievement.
But as for those who disbelieve and denounce Our revelations—these are the inhabitants of the Fire, remaining in it forever. What a miserable destination!
No tragedy happens except with Allah's permission. Whoever believes in Allah, He guides his heart. And Allah has full knowledge of all things.
So obey Allah, and obey the Messenger. But if you turn away—Our Messenger’s duty is only to deliver clearly.
Allah—there is no god but He. So in Allah, let the believers put their trust.
O you who believe! Among your spouses and your children are enemies to you, so beware of them. But if you pardon, and overlook, and forgive—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Your possessions and your children are a test, but with Allah is a splendid reward.
So be conscious of Allah, to the best of your ability, and listen, and obey, and spend in charity—for your own good. Whoever is safeguarded from his selfishness: these are the successful.
If you lend Allah a good loan, He will multiply it for you, and forgive you. Allah is Appreciative and Forbearing.
The Knower of the Unseen and the Seen—the Almighty, the Wise.
O Prophet! If any of you divorce women, divorce them during their period of purity—and calculate their term. And reverence Allah, your Lord. And do not expel them from their homes, nor shall they leave, unless they have committed a proven indecency. These are the limits set by Allah. Whoever oversteps the limits set by Allah has wronged his own soul. You never know; Allah may afterward bring about a new situation.
Once they have reached their term, either retain them nicely or separate from them nicely. And call to witness two just people from among you. And give upright testimony for Allah. By this is exhorted whoever believes in Allah and the Last Day. And whoever reverences Allah: He will make a way out for him.
And will provide for him from where he never expected. Whoever relies on Allah: He is enough for him. Allah fulfills His Will. Allah has set a measure for all things.
As for your women who have reached menopause: if you have any doubts, their term shall be three months—as well as for those who are yet to menstruate. As for those who are pregnant: their term shall be until they have delivered. Whoever is conscious of Allah: He will make things easy for him.
That is the command of Allah, which He has revealed to you. Whoever is mindful of Allah: He will remit his sins, and will amplify his reward.
Let them reside where you reside, according to your means. And do not harm them to pressure them. And if they are pregnant, then spend on them until they have delivered. And if they nurse for you, compensate them fairly. And maintain your relationship in amity. And if you have difficulty with one another, then let another woman nurse for him.
The wealthy shall spend according to his means. As for the one with limited resources, let him spend according to what Allah has given him. Allah never burdens a soul beyond what He has given it. Allah will bring ease after hardship.
How many a society rebelled against the commandments of its Lord and His messengers? So We held it strictly accountable, and We subjected it to a dreadful punishment.
So it tasted the bad consequences of its decisions, and the outcome of its decisions was perdition.
Allah has prepared for them a severe punishment. So beware of Allah, O you who possess intellect and have believed. Allah has revealed to you a Reminder.
A messenger reciting to you the Clear Verses of Allah, to bring those who believe and work righteousness from darkness into light. Whoever believes in Allah and acts with integrity, He will admit him into Gardens beneath which rivers flow, to stay there forever. Allah has given him an excellent provision.
Allah is He Who created seven heavens, and from the earth the like thereof. The command descends through them, so you may know that Allah is capable of everything, and that Allah has encompassed everything in knowledge.
O prophet! Why do you prohibit what Allah has permitted for you, seeking to please your wives? Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
Allah has mandated for you the dissolution of your oaths. And Allah is your Master. And He is the Knower, the Wise.
The Prophet had confided something to one of his wives. But when she disclosed it, and Allah made it known to him: he confirmed part of it, and he avoided another part. Then, when he informed her of it, she said, “Who informed you of this?” He said, “The Knower, the Aware informed me.”
If you repent to Allah, then your hearts have inclined. But if you collaborate against him, then Allah is his Protector, as are Gabriel and the righteous believers. In addition, the angels will support him.
Perhaps, if he divorces you, his Lord will give him in exchange wives better than you: submissive, believing, obedient, penitent, dedicated to worship, and given to wayfaring—previously married, or virgins.
O you who believe! Protect yourselves and your families from a Fire, whose fuel is people and stones. Overseeing it are angels, fierce and severe. They never disobey Allah in anything He has commanded them, and they carry out whatever they are commanded.
O you who disbelieved! Make no excuses today. You are being penalized for what you used to do.
O you who believe! Repent to Allah with sincere repentance. Perhaps your Lord will remit your sins, and admit you into Gardens under which rivers flow—on the Day when Allah will not disappoint the Prophet and those who believed with him. Their light streaming ahead of them, and to their right, and they say, “Our Lord, complete our light for us, and forgive us; You are capable of all things.”
O prophet! Strive hard against the unbelievers and the hypocrites, and be stern with them. Their dwelling is Gehenna. What a miserable destination.
Allah illustrates an example for those who disbelieve: the wife of Noah and the wife of Lot. They were under two of Our righteous servants, but they betrayed them. They availed them nothing against Allah, and it was said, “Enter the Fire with those who are entering.”
And Allah illustrates an example for those who believe: the wife of Pharaoh, when she said, “My Lord! Build for me a house in Paradise near You, and rescue me from Pharaoh and his works, and rescue me from the wrongdoing people.”
And Mary, the daughter of Imran, who guarded her womb, and so We blew into her of Our Spirit, and she testified to the Words of her Lord and His Scriptures—and was among the devout.
Exalted is He in whose hand lies sovereignty, and He has power over all things.
He who created death and life—to test you—which of you is best in conduct. He is the Almighty, the Forgiving.
He who created seven universes in layers. You see no discrepancy in the creation of the Compassionate. Look again. Can you see any cracks?
Then look again, and again, and your sight will return to you dazzled and exhausted.
And We have beautified the lower heaven with lanterns, and We made them missiles against the devils, and We have prepared for them the suffering of the Blaze.
For those who reject their Lord: there is the torment of Hell, a miserable destination.
When they are thrown into it, they will hear it roaring, as it seethes.
It almost bursts with fury. Every time a batch is thrown into it, its keepers will ask them, “Did not a warner come to you?”
They will say, “Yes, a warner did come to us, but we denied, and said, ‘Allah did not send anything down; you are very much mistaken.’”
And they will say, “Had we listened or reasoned, we would not be among the inmates of the Blaze.”
So they will acknowledge their sins. So away with the residents of the Blaze.
As for those who fear their Lord unseen—for them is forgiveness and a great reward.
Whether you keep your thoughts secret, or you declare them—He is Aware of the inner thoughts.
Would He not know, He Who created? He is the Subtle, the Expert.
It is He who made the earth manageable for you. So travel its regions, and eat from His provision. And to Him is the Resurgence.
Do you feel secure that He Who is in heaven will not cause the earth to collapse beneath you while it spins?
Or do you feel secure that He Who is in heaven will not unleash against you a violent storm? Then you will know what My warning is like.
Those before them also denied. So how was My disapproval?
Or have they not seen the birds above them, spreading their wings, and folding them? None holds them except the Compassionate. He is Perceiver of all things.
Or who can be a force to protect you other than the Merciful? The unbelievers are in nothing but delusion.
Or who is he who will provide for you, if He withholds His provision? Yet they persist in defiance and aversion.
Is he who walks bent on his own design better guided, or he who walks upright on a straight path?
Say, “It is He who produced you; and made for you the hearing, and the vision, and the organs. But rarely do you give thanks.”
Say, “It is He who scattered you on earth. And to Him, you will be gathered.”
And they say, “When will this promise be fulfilled—if  you are truthful?”
Say, “Knowledge is with Allah, and I am only a clear warner.”
But when they see it approaching, the faces of those who disbelieved will turn gloomy, and it will be said, “This is what you used to call for.”
Say, “Have you considered? Should Allah destroy me and those with me, or else bestows His mercy on us, who will protect the disbelievers from an agonizing punishment?”
Say, “He is the Mercy-Giver. In Him, we believe, and in Him we trust. And you will soon know who is clearly astray.”
Say, “Have you considered? If your water drains away, who could bring you pure running water?”
Nuun. By the pen, and by what they write.
By the grace of your Lord, you are not insane.
In fact, you will have an unending reward.
And you are of a great moral character.
You will see, and they will see.
Which of you is the afflicted.
Your Lord knows best who has strayed from His path, and He knows best the well-guided.
So do not obey the deniers.
They wish that you would compromise, so they would compromise.
And do not obey any vile swearer.
Backbiter, spreader of slander.
Preventer of good, transgressor, sinful.
Rude and fake besides.
Just because he has money and children.
When Our Verses are recited to him, he says, “Myths of the ancients!”
We will mark him on the snout.
We tested them, as We tested the owners of the garden—when they vowed to harvest it in the morning.
And they made no exception.
But a disaster from your Lord went around it while they slept.
And it became as if picked.
In the morning, they called one another.
“Go early to your plantation, if you want to harvest.”
So they set out, whispering to one another.
“No poor person is to enter it upon you today.”
And they proceeded early, resolved in intent.
But when they saw it, they said, “We are lost.
In fact, we are deprived.”
The most moderate of them said, “Did I not say to you, ‘if only you would praise?’”
They said, “Glory be to our Lord—We were in the wrong.”
Then they turned to one another, blaming one another.
They said, “Woe to us—we were domineering.
Perhaps our Lord will give us a better substitute for it. We are turning to our Lord in hope .”
Such is the punishment. But the punishment of the Hereafter is greater—if they only knew.
For the righteous are Gardens of Delight with their Lord.
Shall We treat the submitters like the villains?
What is the matter with you? How do you judge?
Or do you have a scripture in which you study?
That you will have in it whatever you choose?
Or do you have oaths from Us, binding until Resurrection Day, that whatever you demand is yours?
Ask them, which of them will guarantee that!
Or do they have partners? Then let them bring their partners—if they are truthful.
On the Day when the Shin will be exposed, and they will be called to bow down, but they will be unable.
Their eyes subdued, covered with shame. They were invited to prostrate when they were sound.
So leave Me to those who reject this message. We will proceed against them gradually, from where they do not know.
And I will give them time. My plan is firm.
Or are you asking them for a fee, so they are burdened with debt?
Or do they know the future, and so they write it down?
So be patient with your Lord’s Judgment. And do not be like the Fellow of the Whale who cried out in despair.
Had the blessing from his Lord not reached him, he would have been thrown onto the barren shore, and he was blamed.
But his Lord chose him, and He made him of the righteous.
Those who disbelieve almost stab you with their glances when they hear the message, and they say, “He is crazy!”
But it is only a reminder for humankind.
The Reality.
What is the Reality?
What will make you understand what the Reality is?
Thamood and Aad denied the Catastrophe.
As for Thamood, they were annihilated by the Overwhelming.
And as for Aad, they were annihilated by a furious, roaring wind.
He unleashed it against them for seven nights and eight days, in succession. You could see the people tossed around, as if they were hollow palm trunks.
Can you see any remnant of them?
Then came Pharaoh, and those before him, and the Overturned Cities indulged in sin.
They disobeyed their Lord's messenger, so He seized them with a devastating grip.
When the waters overflowed, We carried you in the cruising Ark.
To make it a lesson for you—and so that retaining ears may retain it.
Then, when the Trumpet is blown, a single blow.
And the earth and the mountains are lifted, and crushed with a single blow.
On that Day, the Inevitable will come to pass.
And the sky will crack. On that Day, it will be frail.
And the angels will be ranged around its borders, while on that day eight will be carrying your Lord’s throne above them.
On that Day, you will be exposed, and no secret of yours will remain hidden.
As for him who is given his book in his right hand, he will say, “Here, take my book and read it.
I knew I would be held accountable.”
So he will be in pleasant living.
In a lofty Garden.
Its pickings are within reach.
“Eat and drink merrily for what you did in days gone by.”
But as for him who is given his book in his left hand, he will say, “I wish I was never given my book.
And never knew what my account was.
I wish it was the end.
My money did not avail me.
My power has vanished from me.”
“Take him and shackle him.
Then scorch him in the Blaze.
Then in a chain whose length is seventy cubits, tie him up.
For he would not believe in Allah, the Great.
Nor would he advocate the feeding of the destitute.
So he has no friend here today.
And no food, except scum.
Which none will eat, except the sinners.”
So I swear by what you see.
And by what you do not see.
It is the speech of a noble messenger.
And it is not the speech of a poet—little do you believe.
Nor is it the speech of a fortune-teller. Little do you reflect.
A revelation from the Lord of the Worlds.
Had he falsely attributed some statements to Us.
We would have seized him by the right arm.
Then slashed his lifeline.
And none of you could have restrained Us from him.
And it is a reminder for the righteous.
And We know that some of you will deny it.
And it is a source of regret for the unbelievers.
Yet it is the truth of certainty.
So glorify the Name of your Lord, the Magnificent.
A questioner asked about the impending punishment.
For the disbelievers—to be repelled by none.
From Allah, Lord of the ascending ways.
To Him ascend the angels and the Spirit on a Day whose duration is fifty thousand years.
So be patient, with beautiful patience.
They see it distant.
But We see it near.
On the Day when the sky becomes like molten brass.
And the mountains become like tufted wool.
No friend will ask about a friend.
They will be shown each other. The criminal will wish he could be redeemed from the punishment of that Day by his children.
And his spouse, and his brother.
And his family that sheltered him.
And everyone on earth altogether, just to save him.
By no means! It is a Raging Flame.
It strips away the scalps.
It invites him who once turned his back and fled.
And accumulated and hoarded.
The human being was created anxious.
Touched by adversity, he is fretful.
Touched by good, he is ungenerous.
Except for the prayerful.
Those who are constant in their prayers.
And those in whose wealth is a rightful share.
For the beggar and the deprived.
And those who affirm the Day of Judgment.
And those who dread their Lord’s punishment.
Their Lord’s punishment is not to be taken for granted.
And those who guard their private parts.
Except from their spouses, or those living under their control, for then they are blameless.
But whoever seeks beyond that—these are the transgressors.
And those who observe their trusts and their promises.
And those who uphold their testimony.
And those who are dedicated to their prayers.
These will be honored in Gardens.
What is with those who disbelieve, scrambling towards you?
From the right, and from the left, in droves?
Is every one of them aspiring to be admitted into a Garden of Bliss?
No indeed! We created them from what they know.
I swear by the Lord of the Easts and the Wests, that We are Capable.
Of replacing them with what is better than they, and We are not to be surpassed.
So leave them to blunder and play, until they meet their Day which they are promised.
The Day when they will emerge from the graves in a rush, as if they were racing to a target.
Their eyes downcast, overwhelmed by disgrace. This is the Day which they were promised.
We sent Noah to his people: “Warn your people before a painful punishment comes upon them.”
He said, “O my people, I am a clear warner to you.
Worship Allah, and reverence Him, and obey me.
He will forgive you of your sins, and He will delay you until a stated time. Allah’s time cannot be postponed once it has arrived—if you only knew.”
He said, “My Lord, I have called my people night and day.
But my call added only to their flight.
And whenever I called them to Your forgiveness, they thrust their fingers into their ears, and wrapped themselves with their clothes, and insisted, and became more and more arrogant.
Then I called them openly.
Then I appealed to them publicly, and I spoke to them privately.
I said, ‘Ask your Lord for forgiveness; He is Forgiving.
He will let loose the sky upon you in abundant rain.
And will supply you with wealth and children, and will give you gardens, and will give you rivers.
What is the matter with you, that you do not hope for Allah with dignity?
Although He created you in stages.
Do you not see how Allah created seven heavens in layers?
And He placed the moon in their midst for light, and He made the sun a lamp.
And Allah germinated you from the earth like plants.
Then He will return you into it, and He will bring you out again.
And Allah made the earth a spread for you.
So that you may travel its diverse roadways.’”
Noah said, “My Lord, they have defied me, and followed him whose wealth and children increase him only in loss.”
And they schemed outrageous schemes.
And they said, “Do not give up your gods; do not give up Wadd, nor Souwa, nor Yaghoos, Yaooq, and Nassr.
They have misled many, so increase the wrongdoers only in confusion.”
Because of their wrongs, they were drowned, then hurled into a Fire, and they found none to help them against Allah.
And Noah said, “My Lord, do not leave a single unbeliever on earth.
If You leave them, they will mislead your worshipers, and breed nothing but immoral unbelievers.
My Lord! Forgive me and my parents, and anyone who enters my home in faith, and the believing men and believing women, and do not increase the wrongdoers except in ruin.”
Say, “It was revealed to me that a group of jinn listened in, and said, ‘We have heard a wondrous Recitation.
It guides to sound judgment, so we have believed in it, and we will never associate anyone with our Lord.
And He—exalted be the Grandeur of our Lord—never had a spouse, nor a child.
But the fools among us used to say nonsense about Allah.
And we had thought that humans and jinn would never speak lies about Allah.
And some individual humans used to seek power through some individual jinn, but they only increased them in confusion.
And they thought, as you thought, that Allah would resurrect no one.
And we probed the heaven, and we found it filled with fierce guards and projectiles.
And we used to take up positions to listen in, but whoever listens now finds a flare lying in wait for him.
And we do not know whether ill is intended for those on earth, or whether their Lord intends guidance for them.
And among us are the righteous, but some of us are otherwise. We follow divergent paths.
And we knew for certain that we could never thwart Allah on earth; nor could we ever thwart Him by fleeing.
And when we heard the guidance, we believed in it. Whoever believes in his Lord fears neither denial nor burden.
And among us are the submitters, and among us are the deviant. As for those who have submitted—it is they who have attained Right Guidance.
But as for the unjust—they will be fuel for Hell.’”
And had they kept true to the Path, We would have given them abundant water to drink.
To test them with it. Whoever turns away from his Lord's remembrance, He will direct him to torment ever mounting.
And the places of worship are for Allah. So do not call, besides Allah, upon anyone else.
And when Allah's servant stood up calling on Him, they almost fell on him in a mass.
Say, “I pray only to my Lord, and I never associate anyone with Him.”
Say, “It is not in my power to harm you, nor to bring you to right conduct.”
Say, “None will protect me from Allah; and I will find no refuge, except in Him.
Except for a proclamation from Allah and His messages. Whoever disobeys Allah and His Messenger—for him is the Fire of Hell, remaining in it forever.”
Until, when they see what they were promised, they will know who is weaker in helpers, and fewer in number.
Say, “I do not know whether what you are promised is near, or if my Lord will extend it for a period.”
The Knower of the invisible; He does not disclose His Unseen to anyone.
Except to a Messenger of His choosing. He then dispatches guards in front of him, and behind him.
So that He may know that they have conveyed their Lord’s message. He surrounds whatsoever is with them, and He has tallied everything by number.
O you Enwrapped.
Stand vigil at night, except a little.
Half of it, or reduce it a little.
Or add to it—and recite the Quran slowly and rhythmically.
We are about to give you a heavy message.
The vigil of the night is more effective—and more conducive to recitation.
In the daytime, you have long work to do.
So remember the Name of your Lord, and devote yourself to Him wholeheartedly.
Lord of the East and the West. There is no god except He, so take Him as a Trustee.
And patiently endure what they say, and withdraw from them politely.
And leave to Me the deniers—those of luxury—and bear with them for a little while.
With Us are shackles, and a Fierce Fire.
And food that chokes, and painful punishment.
On the Day when the earth and the mountains tremble, and the mountains become heaps of sand.
We sent to you a messenger, a witness over you, as We sent to Pharaoh a messenger.
But Pharaoh disobeyed the Messenger, so We seized him with a crushing seizing.
So how will you, if you persist in unbelief, save yourself from a Day which will turn the children gray-haired?
The sky will shatter thereby. His promise is always fulfilled.
This is a reminder. So whoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord.
Your Lord knows that you stand vigil nearly two-thirds of the night, or half of it, or third of it, along with a group of those with you. Allah determines the night and the day. He knows that you will be unable to sustain it, so He has relented towards you. So read of the Quran what is easy for you. He knows that some of you may be ill; and others traveling through the land, seeking Allah’s bounty; and others fighting in Allah’s way. So read of it what is easy for you, and perform the prayer, and give the purifying charity, and lend Allah a loan of goodness. Whatever good you advance for yourselves, you will find it with Allah, improved and greater in reward. And ask Allah for forgiveness—Allah is Forgiving and Merciful.
O you covered up.
Arise and warn.
And glorify your Lord.
And purify your clothes.
And abandon abominations.
And show no favor, seeking gain.
And be constant for your Lord.
When the Trumpet is sounded.
That Day will be a difficult day.
For the disbelievers—not easy.
Leave Me alone to him whom I created.
And gave him vast wealth.
And children as witnesses.
And smoothed things for him.
Yet he desires that I should add more.
By no means! He was stubborn towards Our revelations.
I will exhaust him increasingly.
He thought and analyzed.
May he perish, how he analyzed.
Again: may he perish, how he analyzed.
Then he looked.
Then he frowned and whined.
Then he turned his back and was proud.
And said, “This is nothing but magic from the past.
This is nothing but the word of a human being.”
I will roast him in Saqar.
But what will explain to you what Saqar is?
It neither leaves nor spares.
It scorches the skin.
Over it are Nineteen.
We have appointed none but angels as wardens of the Fire; and We caused their number to be a stumbling block for those who disbelieve; so that those given the Scripture may attain certainty; and those who believe may increase in faith; and those given the Scripture and the believers may not doubt; and those in whose hearts is sickness and the unbelievers may say, “What did Allah intend by this parable?” Thus Allah leads astray whom He wills, and He guides whom He wills. And none knows the soldiers of your Lord except He. And it is but a reminder to the humans.
But no! By the moon.
And the night as it retreats.
And the morning as it brightens.
It is one of the greatest.
A warning to humans.
To those among you who wish to advance, or lag behind.
Every soul is hostage to what it has done.
Except for those on the Right.
In Gardens, asking one another.
About the guilty.
“What led you into Saqar?”
They will say, “We were not of those who prayed.
Nor did we feed the poor.
And we used to indulge with those who indulge.
And we used to deny Judgement Day.
Until certainty came upon us.”
But the intercession of intercessors will not benefit them.
So what is the matter with them, turning away from the Reminder?
As if they were panicked donkeys.
Fleeing from a lion.
Yet every one of them wants to be given scrolls unrolled.
No indeed! But they do not fear the Hereafter.
Nevertheless, it is a reminder.
So whoever wills, shall remember it.
But they will not remember—unless Allah wills. He is the Source of Righteousness and the Source of Forgiveness.
I swear by the Day of Resurrection.
And I swear by the blaming soul.
Does the human being think that We will not gather his bones?
Yes indeed! We are able to reconstruct his fingertips.
But the human being wants to deny what lies ahead of him.
He asks, “When is the Day of Resurrection?”
When vision is dazzled.
And the moon is eclipsed.
And the sun and the moon are joined together.
On that Day, man will say, “Where is the escape?”
No indeed! There is no refuge.
To your Lord on that Day is the settlement.
On that Day, man will be informed of what he put forward, and what he left behind.
And man will be evidence against himself.
Even as he presents his excuses.
Do not move your tongue with it, to hurry on with it.
Upon Us are its collection and its recitation.
Then, when We have recited it, follow its recitation.
Then upon Us is its explanation.
Alas! But you love the Fleeting.
And you disregard the Hereafter.
Faces on that Day will be radiant.
Looking towards their Lord.
And faces on that Day will be gloomy.
Realizing that a back-breaker has befallen them.
Indeed, when it has reached the collarbones.
And it is said, “Who is the healer?”
And he realizes that it is the parting.
And the leg is entwined with the leg.
To your Lord on that Day is the drive.
He neither believed nor prayed.
But he denied and turned away.
Then he went to his family, walking proudly.
So nearer to you! And nearer!
Then again: Nearer to you! And nearer!
Does the human being think that he will be left without purpose?
Was he not a fertilized egg from ejaculated semen?
Then he became a clot. And He created and proportioned?
And He made of him the two sexes: the male, and the female?
Is not such able to give life to the dead?
Has there come upon the human being a span of time when he was nothing to be mentioned?
We created the human being from a drop of mixed fluid, to test him; and We made him hearing and seeing.
We guided him to the way, be he appreciative or unappreciative.
We have prepared for the disbelievers chains, and yokes, and a Searing Fire.
But the righteous will drink from a cup mixed with aroma.
A spring from which Allah’s servants will drink, making it gush abundantly.
They fulfill their vows, and they dread a Day whose ill is widespread.
And they feed, for the love of Him, the poor, the orphan, and the prisoner.
“We feed you only for Allah’s sake. We desire from you neither compensation nor gratitude.
We dread from our Lord a frowning, grim Day.”
So Allah will shield them from the horror of that Day, and He will grant them radiance and joy.
And He will reward them, for having been patient, with a Garden and silk.
Reclining in it on the couches; experiencing in it neither sun nor bitter cold.
Its shade hovering over them, and its fruit brought low within reach.
Circulating among them are vessels of silver, and cups of crystal.
Crystalline silver—they measured them precisely.
And they will be given a drink flavored with ginger.
From a spring there, named Salsabeel.
Passing among them are eternalized youths. If you saw them, you would think them sprinkled pearls.
If you look, and look, you will see bliss and a vast kingdom.
Upon them are garments of green silk and satin. And they will be decorated with silver bracelets. And their Lord will offer them a pure drink.
“This is a reward for you. Your efforts are well appreciated.”
It is We who sent down the Quran upon you—a gradual revelation.
So be patient with your Lord’s judgment. And obey among them neither sinner nor disbeliever.
And mention the Name of your Lord, morning and evening.
And during the night, prostrate to Him, and glorify Him long into the night.
As for these: they love the transient, and they leave behind a Heavy Day.
We created them, and We strengthened their frames. And whenever We will, We will replace them with others like them.
This is a reminder; so whoever wills, let him take a path to his Lord.
Yet you cannot will—unless Allah wills. Allah is Knowing and Wise.
He admits into His mercy whomever He wills. But as for the wrongdoers, He has prepared for them a painful punishment.
By those sent in succession.
And those storming turbulently.
And the spreaders spreading.
And the separators separating.
And those delivering a reminder.
Excusing or warning.
What you are promised will surely happen.
When the stars are blotted out.
And the sky is fractured.
And the mountains are powdered.
And the messengers’ time is appointed.
Until which Day was it postponed?
Until the Day of Separation.
And what will make you realize what the Day of Separation is?
Woe on that Day to the liars.
Did We not destroy the ancients?
Then succeeded them with the others?
Thus We deal with the guilty.
Woe on that Day to the deniers.
Did We not create you from a base fluid?
Then lodged it in a secure place?
For a known period?
And We measured. How excellently We measure.
Woe on that Day to the falsifiers.
Did We not make the earth a homestead?
For the living and the dead?
And We placed on it lofty mountains, and We gave you fresh water to drink?
Woe on that Day to the rejecters.
“Proceed to what you used to deny.”
“Proceed to a three-pronged shadow.”
That provides no shade, nor avails against the flames.
It shoots up sparks like towers.
As if they are yellow camels.
Woe on that Day to the liars.
This is a Day when they will not speak.
And they will not be permitted to offer excuses.
Woe on that Day to the falsifiers.
This is the Day of Separation. We have gathered you, together with the ancients.
So if you have a scheme, then scheme against Me!
Woe on that Day to the falsifiers.
The reverent will be amidst shades and springs.
And fruits of whatever they desire.
“Eat and drink pleasantly, for what you used to do.”
Thus We reward the virtuous.
Woe on that Day to the deniers.
“Eat and enjoy a little; you are guilty.”
Woe on that Day to the liars.
And when it is said to them, “Bow down,” they do not bow down.
Woe on that Day to the deniers.
So in what saying, beyond this, will they believe?
What are they asking one another about?
About the Momentous News.
About which they disagree.
Surely, they will know.
Most certainly, they will know.
Did We not make the earth a cradle?
And the mountains pegs?
And created you in pairs?
And made your sleep for rest?
And made the night a cover?
And made the day for livelihood?
And constructed above you seven firmaments?
And placed a blazing lamp?
And sent down from the clouds pouring water?
To produce with it grains and vegetation?
And lush gardens?
The Day of Sorting has been appointed.
The Day when the Trumpet is blown, and you will come in crowds.
And the sky is opened up, and it becomes gateways.
And the mountains are set in motion, and they become a mirage.
Hell is lying in ambush.
For the oppressors, a destination.
Where they will remain for eons.
They will taste in it neither coolness nor drink.
Except boiling water and freezing hail.
An appropriate punishment.
They were not anticipating any reckoning.
And they denied Our signs with utter denial.
And We have recorded everything in a book.
So taste! We will increase you in nothing but suffering.
But for the righteous, there is triumph.
Gardens and vineyards.
And splendid spouses, well-matched.
And overflowing cups.
They will hear in it neither gossip nor lies.
A reward from your Lord, a calculated reward.
Lord of the heavens and the earth, and whatever is between them—The Most Merciful—they will have no authorization from Him to speak.
On the Day when the Spirit and the angels stand in a row. They will not speak, except those granted permission by the Compassionate and whose words are true.
This is the Day of Reality. So whoever wills, let him take a path back to his Lord.
We have warned you of an imminent punishment—the Day when a person will observe what his hands have produced, and the unbeliever will say, “I wish I were dust.”
By those snatching violently.
And those removing gently.
And those gliding smoothly.
And those racing swiftly.
And those regulating events.
On the Day when the Quake quakes.
And is followed by the Successor.
Hearts on that Day will be pounding.
Their sights downcast.
They say, “Are we to be restored to the original condition?
When we have become hollow bones?”
They say, “This is a losing proposition.”
But it will be only a single nudge.
And they will be awake.
Has the story of Moses reached you?
When His Lord called out to him in the sacred valley of Tuwa.
“Go to Pharaoh—he has transgressed.”
And say, “Do you care to be purified?
And I will guide you to your Lord, and you will turn reverent.”
Then he showed him the Great Miracle.
But he denied and disobeyed.
Then he turned his back, and tried.
And gathered and proclaimed.
He said, “I am your Lord, the most high.”
So Allah seized him with exemplary punishment, in the last and in the first.
In this is a lesson for whoever fears.
Are you more difficult to create, or the sky? He constructed it.
He raised its masses, and He proportioned it.
And He dimmed its night, and He brought out its daylight.
And after that, He spread out the earth.
And from it, He brought out its water and its pasture.
And the mountains, He anchored.
A source of enjoyment for you and your livestock.
But when the Great Cataclysm befalls.
A Day when the human being will remember what he has endeavored.
And the Furnace will be displayed for whoever sees.
As for him who has transgressed.
And preferred the life of this world.
Then the Furnace is the shelter.
But as for him who feared the Standing of his Lord, and restrained the self from desires.
Then Paradise is the shelter.
They ask you about the Hour, “When will it take place?”
You have no knowledge of it.
To your Lord is its finality.
You are only to warn whoever dreads it.
On the Day when they see it—it will be as if they had stayed only an evening or its morning.
He frowned and turned away.
Because the blind man came to him.
But how do you know? Perhaps he was seeking to purify himself.
Or be reminded, and the message would benefit him.
But as for him who was indifferent.
You gave him your attention.
Though you are not liable if he does not purify himself.
But as for him who came to you seeking.
In awe.
To him you were inattentive.
Do not. This is a Lesson.
So whoever wills, shall take notice from it.
In honorable pages.
Elevated and purified.
By the hands of scribes.
Noble and virtuous.
Perish the human being! How ungrateful he is!
From what thing did He create him?
From a drop He created him. Then He proportioned him.
Then He eased the way for him.
Then He puts him to death, and He buries him.
Then, whenever He wills, He will resurrect him.
But no, he did not fulfill what He commanded him.
Let the human being look at his food.
How We pour down water in abundance.
Then crack the soil open.
And grow in it grains.
And grapes and herbs.
And olives and dates.
And luscious gardens.
And fruits and vegetables.
As sustenance for you and for your livestock.
But when the Deafening Blast comes to pass.
The Day when a person will flee from his brother.
And his mother and his father.
And his spouse and his children.
Every one of them, on that Day, will have enough to preoccupy him.
Faces on that Day will be radiant.
Laughing and rejoicing.
And faces on that Day will be covered with dust.
Covered by darkness.
These are the faithless, the vicious.
When the sun is rolled.
And the stars are dimmed.
And the mountains are set in motion.
And the relationships are suspended.
And the beasts are gathered.
And the oceans are set aflame.
And the souls are paired.
And the girl, buried alive, is asked:
For what crime was she killed?
And when the pages are made public.
And the sky is peeled away.
And the Fire is set ablaze.
And Paradise is brought near.
Each soul will know what it has readied.
I swear by the galaxies.
Precisely running their courses.
And by the night, as it dissipates.
And by the morning, as it breathes.
This is the speech of a noble messenger.
Endowed with strength, secure with the Lord of the Throne.
Obeyed and trustworthy.
Your friend is not possessed.
He saw him on the clear horizon.
And He does not withhold knowledge of the Unseen.
And it is not the word of an outcast devil.
So where are you heading?
It is nothing but a reminder for humankind.
To whoever among you wills to go straight.
But you cannot will, unless Allah wills, Lord of the Worlds.
When the sky breaks apart.
When the planets are scattered.
When the oceans are exploded.
When the graves are tossed around.
Every soul will know what it has advanced, and what it has deferred.
O, man! What deluded you concerning your Lord, the Most Generous?
He Who created you, and formed you, and proportioned you.
In whatever form He willed, He assembled you.
But you reject the religion.
Although there are guardians over you.
Honest recorders.
They know everything you do.
The righteous will be in bliss.
And the wicked will be in Hell.
They will enter it on Judgment Day.
And they will not be absent from it.
And what will make you realize what Judgment Day is?
Then again, what will make you realize what Judgment Day is?
The Day when no soul will avail another soul whatsoever—and all authority on that Day is Allah’s.
Woe to the defrauders.
Those who, when they take a measure from people, demand in full.
But when they measure or weigh to others, they cheat.
Do these not know that they will be resurrected?
For a Tremendous Day?
The Day when Humankind will stand before the Lord of the Worlds?
Not at all. The record of the wicked is in Sijjeen.
And what will make you realize what Sijjeen is?
A numerical book.
Woe on that Day to the deniers.
Those who deny the Day of Reckoning.
But none denies it except the sinful aggressor.
When Our Verses are read to him, he says, “Legends of the ancients.”
But no! Their hearts have become corroded by what they used to commit.
Undoubtedly, on that Day, they will be screened from their Lord.
Then they will roast in the Blaze.
Then it will be said, “This is what you used to deny.”
No indeed. The record of the righteous is in Elliyyeen.
And what will make you realize what Elliyyoon is?
A numerical book.
Witnessed by those brought near.
Surely, the virtuous will be in bliss.
On luxurious furnishings, gazing around.
You will recognize on their faces the radiance of bliss.
They will be given to drink of pure sealed wine.
Its seal is musk—this is what competitors should compete for.
And its mixture is of Tasneem.
A spring from which those brought near drink.
Those who committed crimes used to laugh at those who believed.
And when they passed by them, they would wink at one another.
And when they returned to their families, they would return joyfully.
And when they saw them, they would say, “These people are lost.”
Although they were not sent as guardians over them.
But on that Day, those who believed will laugh at the unbelievers.
On luxurious furnishings, looking on.
Have the unbelievers been repaid for what they used to do?
When the sky is ruptured.
And obeys its Lord, as it must.
And when the earth is stretched.
And ejects its contents and becomes empty.
And obeys its Lord, as it must.
O, man! You are laboring towards your Lord, and you will meet Him.
As for him who is given his book in his right hand.
He will be reckoned with an easy reckoning.
And will return to his family delighted.
But as for him who is given his book behind his back.
He will call for destruction.
And will enter a Blaze.
He used to be happy among his family.
He thought he would not return.
In fact, His Lord was watching him.
I swear by the twilight.
And by the night, and what it enshrouds.
And by the moon, when it is full.
You will mount stage by stage.
So what is the matter with them, that they do not believe?
And when the Quran is read to them, they do not bow down?
In fact, those who disbelieve are in denial.
But Allah knows what they hide inside.
So inform them of a painful punishment.
Except for those who believe and do good deeds—they will have a never-ending reward.
By the sky full of constellations.
And by the Promised Day.
And by the witness and the witnessed.
Destroyed were the People of the Trench.
The fire supplied with fuel.
While they sat around it.
And were witnessing what they were doing to the believers.
They took vengeance on them only because they believed in Allah the Almighty, the Praised.
He to Whom belongs sovereignty over the heavens and the earth. And Allah is witness over everything.
Those who persecute believing men and believing women, then do not repent: for them is the punishment of Hell, and for them is the punishment of Burning.
Those who believe and do righteous deeds will have Gardens beneath which rivers flow: that is the supreme triumph.
The onslaught of your Lord is severe.
It is He who begins and repeats.
And He is the Forgiving, the Loving.
Owner of the Glorious Throne.
Doer of whatever He wills.
Has the story of the legions reached you?
Of Pharaoh and Thamood?
In fact, those who disbelieve are in denial.
But Allah encloses them from beyond.
In fact, it is a Glorious Quran.
In a Preserved Tablet.
By the sky and the Pulsar.
And what will make you realize what the Pulsar is?
The Piercing Star.
There is no soul without a guardian over it.
So let the human being consider what he was created from.
He was created from gushing fluid.
Issuing from between the backbone and the breastbones.
He is certainly able to return him.
On the Day when secrets are disclosed.
He will have neither strength nor helper.
By the sky that returns.
And the earth that cracks open.
It is a Decisive Word.
And it is no joke.
They plot and scheme.
But I plan and plan.
Therefore, give the unbelievers some time; leave them for a while.
Praise the Name of your Lord, the Most High.
He who creates and regulates.
He who measures and guides.
He who produces the pasture.
Then reduces it to light debris.
We will make you read, so do not forget.
Except what Allah wills. He knows what is declared, and what is hidden.
We will facilitate for you the Way of Ease.
So remind, if the reminder is beneficial.
He who fears will take notice.
But the most wretched will avoid it.
He who will enter the Gigantic Fire.
Where he will neither die, nor live.
Successful is he who purifies himself.
And remembers the Name of his Lord, and prays.
But you prefer the present life.
Even though the Hereafter is better and more lasting.
This is in the earlier scriptures.
The Scriptures of Abraham and Moses.
Has the news of the Overwhelming reached you?
Faces on that Day will be downcast.
Laboring and exhausted.
Entering a scorching Fire.
Given to drink from a flaming spring.
They will have no food except thorns.
Neither nourishing nor satisfying hunger.
Faces on that Day will be radiant.
Satisfied with their endeavor.
In a lofty Garden.
In it, you will hear no nonsense.
In it, is a flowing spring.
In it, are raised beds.
And cups set in place.
And cushions lined up.
And carpets spread around.
Do they not look at the camels—how they are created?
And at the sky—how it is raised?
And at the mountains—how they are installed?
And at the earth—how it is spread out?
So remind. You are only a reminder.
You have no control over them.
But whoever turns away and disbelieves.
Allah will punish him with the greatest punishment.
To Us is their return.
Then upon Us rests their reckoning.
By the dawn.
And ten nights.
And the even and the odd.
And the night as it recedes.
Is there an oath in that for a rational person?
Did you not see how your Lord dealt with Aad?
Erum of the pillars.
The like of which was never created in the land.
And Thamood—those who carved out the rocks in the Valley.
And Pharaoh of the Stakes.
Those who committed excesses in the lands.
And spread much corruption in it.
So your Lord poured down on them a scourge of punishment.
Your Lord is on the lookout.
As for the human being, whenever his Lord tests him, and honors him, and prospers him, he says, “My Lord has honored me.”
But whenever He tests him, and He restricts his livelihood for him, he says, “My Lord has disgraced me.”
Not at all. But you are not generous towards the orphan.
And you do not urge the feeding of the poor.
And you devour inheritance with all greed.
And you love wealth with immense love.
No—when the earth is pounded, crushed, and leveled.
And your Lord comes, with the angels, row after row.
And on that Day, Hell will be brought. On that Day, the human being will remember, but how will remembrance avail him?
He will say, “If only I had forwarded for my life.”
On that Day, none will punish as He punishes.
And none will shackle as He shackles.
But as for you, O tranquil soul.
Return to your Lord, pleased and accepted.
Enter among My worshipers.
Enter My Garden.
I swear by this land.
And you are free in this land.
And by a father and what he fathered.
We created the human being in distress.
Does he think that none will ever have power over him?
He says, “I have squandered vast wealth.”
Does he think that no one sees him?
Did We not make for him two eyes?
And a tongue, and two lips?
And We guided him to the two ways?
But he did not brave the ascent.
And how would you know what the ascent is?
The freeing of a slave.
Or the feeding on a day of hunger.
Of an orphaned relative.
Or a destitute in the dust.
Then he becomes of those who believe, and advise one another to patience, and advise one another to kindness.
These are the people of happiness.
But as for those who defy Our revelations—these are the people of misery.
Upon them is a padlocked Fire.
By the sun and its brightness.
And the moon as it follows it.
And the day as it reveals it.
And the night as it conceals it.
And the sky, and He who built it.
And the earth, and He who spread it.
And the soul, and He who formed it.
And inspired it to its immoralities and its righteousness.
Successful is he who purifies it.
And failing is he who corrupts it.
Thamood denied in its rebelliousness.
When it followed its most wretched.
The messenger of Allah said to them, “Allah's female camel, so let her drink.”
But they denied him, then hamstrung her. So their Lord crushed them for their sin, and He leveled it.
He does not fear its consequences.
By the night as it conceals.
And the day as it reveals.
And He who created the male and the female.
Your endeavors are diverse.
As for him who is charitable and righteous.
And confirms goodness.
We will facilitate for him the path of ease.
But as for him who is stingy and indifferent.
And denies goodness.
We will facilitate for him the path of difficulty.
And his money will not avail him when he plummets.
It is upon Us to guide.
And to Us belong the Last and the First.
I have warned you of a Raging Fire.
Which none will enter except the most wretched.
He who denies and turns away.
But the devout will avoid it.
He who gives his wealth to be purified.
Seeking no favors in return.
Only seeking the attention of his Lord, the Most High.
And he will be pleased.
By the morning brightness.
And the night as it settles.
Your Lord did not abandon you, nor is He displeased.
The Hereafter is better for you than the First.
And your Lord will give you, and you will be satisfied.
Did He not find you orphaned, and He sheltered you?
And found you wandering, and He guided you?
And found you in need, and He enriched you?
Therefore, do not mistreat the orphan.
Nor snub the seeker.
But proclaim the blessings of your Lord.
Did We not soothe your heart for you?
And lift your burden from you.
Which weighed down your back?
And We raised your reputation for you?
With difficulty, there is ease.
With difficulty, there is ease.
When your work is done, turn to devotion.
And be eager for your Lord.
By the fig and the olive.
And Mount Sinai.
And this secure land.
We created the human being in the best design.
Then We reduced him to the lowest of the low.
Except those who believe and do good deeds—they will have an unending reward.
So what makes you deny the religion?
Is Allah not the Wisest of Judges?
Read: In the Name of your Lord, who created.
Created man from a clinging clot.
Read: And your Lord is the Most Generous.
He Who taught by the pen.
Taught man what he never knew.
In fact, the human being oversteps all bounds.
When he considers himself exempt.
But to your Lord is the return.
Have you seen him who prevents?
A servant when he prays?
Do you think he is upon guidance?
Or advocates righteousness?
Did you see how he denied and turned away?
Does he not know that Allah sees?
No. If he does not desist, We will drag him by the forelock.
A lying, sinful forelock.
So let him call his gang.
We will call the Wardens.
No, do not obey him, but bow down, and come near.
We sent it down on the Night of Destiny.
But how would you know what the Night of Destiny is?
The Night of Destiny is better than a thousand months.
In it descend the angels and the Spirit, by their Lord's permission, with every command.
Peace it is—until the break of dawn.
Those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture and the Polytheists were not apart until the Clear Evidence came to them.
A messenger from Allah reciting purified scriptures.
Containing valuable writings.
Those who were given the Scripture did not splinter, until after the Clear Evidence came to them.
They were only commanded to worship Allah, devoting their faith to Him alone, and to practice regular prayer, and to give the purifying charity—that is the upright religion.
Those who disbelieve among the People of the Scripture and the Polytheists will be in the Fire of Hell, remaining in it forever. These are the worst of creatures.
As for those who believe and do good works—these are the best of creatures.
Their reward is with their Lord: Gardens of Eden beneath which rivers flow, remaining in them forever. Allah is pleased with them, and they are pleased with Him. That is for whoever fears His Lord.
When the earth is shaken with its quake.
And the earth brings out its loads.
And the human being says, “What is the matter with it?”
On that Day, it will convey its chronicles.
Because your Lord will have inspired it.
On that Day, the people will emerge in droves, to be shown their works.
Whoever does an atom's weight of good will see it.
And whoever does an atom's weight of evil will see it.
By the panting chargers.
By the igniters of sparks.
By the raiders at dawn.
Raising clouds of dust.
Storming into the midst.
The human being is ungrateful to his Lord.
And he bears witness to that.
And he is fierce in his love of good things.
Does he not know? When the graves’ contents are scattered around.
And the hearts’ contents are retrieved.
On that Day, their Lord is fully informed of them.
The Shocker.
What is the Shocker?
And how would you know what the Shocker is?
The Day when people will be like scattered moths.
And the mountains will be like fluffed up wool.
As for he whose scales are heavy.
He will be in a pleasant life.
But as for he whose scales are light.
His home is the Abyss.
And what will make you realize what it is?
A Raging Fire.
Vying for increase distracts you.
Until you visit the graveyards.
No indeed, you will know.
Again: No indeed, you will know.
No indeed, If you knew with the knowledge of certainty.
You would see the Inferno.
Then you will see it with the eye of certainty.
Then, on that Day, you will be questioned about the pleasures.
By Time.
The human being is in loss.
Except those who believe, and do good works, and recommend truth, and recommend patience.
Woe to every slandering backbiter.
Who amasses wealth and counts it over.
Thinking that his wealth has eternalized him.
By no means. He will be thrown into the Crusher.
And what will make you realize what the Crusher is?
Allah's kindled Fire.
That laps to the hearts.
It closes in on them.
In extended columns.
Have you not seen how your Lord dealt with the masters of the elephant?
Did He not make their plan go wrong?
And sent against them flocks of birds.
Striking them with stones of baked clay.
Leaving them like chewed-up leaves.
For the security of Quraish.
Their security during winter and summer journeys.
Let them worship the Lord of this House.
Who has fed them against hunger, and secured them against fear.
Have you considered him who denies the religion?
It is he who pushes the orphan away.
And does not urge the feeding of the poor.
So woe to those who pray.
Those who are heedless of their prayers.
Those who put on the appearance.
And refuse small kindnesses.
We have given you plenty.
So pray to your Lord and sacrifice.
He who hates you is cut off.
Say, “O disbelievers.
I do not worship what you worship.
Nor do you worship what I worship.
Nor do I serve what you serve.
Nor do you serve what I serve.
To you your religion, and to me my religion.”
When Allah’s Victory and Conquest come.
And you see the people entering Allah’s religion in crowds.
Then celebrate the praises of your Lord, and seek His forgiveness. He is the Acceptor of Repentance.
Condemned are the hands of Abee Lahab, and he is condemned.
His wealth did not avail him, nor did what he acquired.
He will enter a Blazing Fire.
And his wife—the firewood carrier.
Around her neck is a rope of thorns.
Say, “He is Allah, the One.
Allah, the Eternal.
He begets not, nor was He begotten.
And there is none comparable to Him.”
Say, “I seek refuge in the Lord of Daybreak.
From the evil of what He created.
And from the evil of the darkness as it gathers.
And from the evil of those who practice sorcery.
And from the evil of an envier when he envies.”
Say, “I seek refuge in the Lord of humankind.
The King of humankind.
The God of humankind.
From the evil of the sneaky whisperer.
Who whispers into the hearts of people.
From among the jinn and among humankind.”
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     
                                                     